

THE NEW AMERICAN COMMENTARY




1, 2 Chronicles


J. A. Thompson





Author’s Preface


When I received an invitation in June 1988 to participate in The New American Commentary by writing a commentary on 1, 2 Chronicles, I responded to the invitation very happily. It seemed to be a good opportunity for an Australian to become involved in an American Enterprise. I was happy also to be invited to participate in an Old Testament commentary since this has been my area of research and teaching in theological colleges and in a secular university over many years, where I have taught Old Testament, Hebrew, and Aramaic for much of my teaching life. Another attraction to become involved in such a project was that I would be participating in a joint enterprise with fellow Baptists from other parts of the world, I myself being from Melbourne in the Southern Hemisphere. Further, I have identified myself very happily and with deep conviction with a conservative and evangelical theological stance. For me, the Bible is the Word of God bringing to humankind the mind of God on all sorts of issues and constituting a challenge to human thought and life, calling its readers to an understanding of how God would have them live in the contemporary world.
The Books of Chronicles present the commentator with their own particular problems. For instance, the question of the historicity of these sections of Chronicles that are not dependent on Samuel-Kings is often raised, and questions are asked about the historical value of other sources the Chronicler may have used. The questions of the original author’s intention in producing the work and of his main theological perspectives present their own challenges. Also, what was the author’s own preferred vocabulary in developing his main themes? In addition, a number of important technical questions need to be explored; the reason for the chronological tables, the literary forms, the unity of the work, its authorship, and date. These and other issues will need to be investigated.
Sometimes the commentary will take up important philological, syntactical, and exegetical concerns. Most of these will be taken up in footnotes. Frequently, comparison will be made with other works that deal with similar material. The Books of Samuel and Kings are important in this respect. In making such comparisons, the distinctive emphasis of the writer of 1, 2 Chronicles will become much clearer. Because of the nature of this particular commentary series, references to important bibliography, whether books or articles, are kept to a minimum, although a certain number seemed to be essential. Most of these are in English. But these will have their own footnotes that will enable the readers of this commentary on Chronicles to expand their horizons. However, no important issue will be avoided altogether. Since the target readership is the pastor and student rather than the technical scholar, there will be gaps in the treatment from the viewpoint of some readers.
I am grateful to those who have helped in the production of this commentary. First of all, I thank the producers of The New American Commentary, especially Kenneth Mathews, David Dockery, and Tom Clark, with whom I first had contact, and the rest of the staff at Broadman & Holman who provided help and encouragement.
My typist, Mrs. Bronwyn Donald, has been a great help in deciphering my difficult manuscript and in helping me to draw together the various strands that go to making a unified whole out of a number of parts.
My wife, Marion, has been the “good woman” who stands behind my literary work. This she has done with preliminary typing and has given constant encouragement as the work proceeded. I am grateful to God that despite periods of illness, including a stroke and a prostate operation, this commentary has been brought to completion.
My hope is that this commentary will convey to the modern readers of the text of 1, 2 Chronicles the thought of its original writer as he sought to make clear to us the mind of God in the areas of his concern. For its modern exponent, the present writer, the task of these years has been a glad offering to the Lord himself for his mercy towards me, his servant. My prayer is that the work will help others as much as it has helped me.

J. A. Thompson
Melbourne, Australia









Contents

    Introduction

    1 Chronicles

         I.      God’s People in God’s World (1:1–9:44)
         II.      Saul (9:35–10:14)
         III.      David (11:1–29:19)



INTRODUCTION


1. Name and Place in the Canon

In the Christian canon of Scripture, Chronicles has been divided into two books. In the Hebrew Bible it is called “words [or events] of the days,” although in the Hebrew canon the two books were counted as one. The division into two books was made when the Hebrew text was translated into Greek in pre-Christian times. One reason for this may have been that in Hebrew only the consonants are written (the vowels are implied) whereas in Greek both consonants and vowels are written. Hence in Greek there are approximately double the number of characters to be recorded. As a result the Greek Chronicles came to be spread over two scrolls.
In the Hebrew Bible these two books normally stand at the end of the third division of the Bible known as the Writings. Jesus’ words in Matt 23:35 referring to the death of the priest Zechariah suggest that by New Testament times these books were considered as Scripture and stood at, or near, the end of the collection (cf. 2 Chr 24:20–22). But the English Bible followed the Greek LXX (which named these books “the things left over”) and attached them to the historical books after Samuel and Kings. This is unfortunate because the church has tended to see 1 and 2 Chronicles as a sort of appendix to Samuel-Kings, a supplement containing a collection of priestly observations, and has ignored the unique contents and message of 1 and 2 Chronicles.
If Chronicles is treated as a whole, there is a major break after the genealogies at 1 Chronicles 9. Another major break comes after 2 Chronicles 9, which records the death of Solomon. The stories of David and Solomon should not be split. Solomon’s work was complementary to that of David.


2. The Text of Chronicles

The original Hebrew text is always important in the study of an Old Testament book. For Chronicles we have the usual resources: parallel passages elsewhere in the Hebrew Bible notably in Samuel and Kings; the Greek translation, the LXX; other versions like the Latin and Syriac texts; and, recently, fragments of Chronicles in the Qumran scrolls. Most studies in the past have concentrated on those portions of Chronicles that are paralleled by sections in the Pentateuch or in Samuel-Kings, the so-called synoptic portions. Where Chronicles differs from its original source (Vorlage) in Samuel or Kings scholars assumed that the Chronicler, because of his theological viewpoint, modified the text.
But recent studies have shown that the Chronicler did not modify his sources at will. Rather, some of his sources arose from a different Hebrew tradition from that of the MT. In addition to the Masoretic tradition preserved in the MT, there also existed a “Palestinian” tradition of the texts of the Pentateuch and Samuel-Kings. It is now clear from comparison of Chronicles with the Samaritan Pentateuch and the Greek translations of the Pentateuch that the text Chronicles used was more like these texts than the MT. Similarly, comparison of Chronicles with parallel passages in Samuel-Kings from 4QSama, 4QSamb, and 4QSamc, and the LXX show that the Chronicles text is more like these than the MT version of Samuel-Kings. The Palestinian text tradition can be identified in the Lucianic LXX, Chronicles, the Dead Sea Scrolls fragments, and the Jewish writer Josephus. In short, the Chronicler faithfully used the sources he had.


3. The Chronicler’s Sources

It seems clear, and it is generally agreed, that the Chronicler’s primary source was the books of Samuel-Kings in the Palestinian tradition. It may appear that we are given a clear pointer to at least some other sources in various citations from official annals like “The Book of the Kings of Judah and Israel” (2 Chr 16:11) or references to prophetic records like those of “Iddo the Seer” (2 Chr 12:15). But the Chronicler almost always refers to his “sources” at the precise points where the author of Kings cites his sources. For example, compare 2 Chr 12:15 with 1 Kgs 14:29; 2 Chr 16:11 with 1 Kgs 15:23; 2 Chr 20:34 with 1 Kgs 22:45; and 2 Chr 25:26 with 2 Kgs 14:18.
Thus we need to use the citation formula with some care. In particular, reference to prophetic records may in fact be to Samuel-Kings and not to some other, independent sources. Evidently other sources were utilized by the Chronicler although we are somewhat uncertain about these. A significant source evidently was that in which the genealogical lists were preserved. Military and census type lists such as we find incorporated in 1 Chronicles 11–12 also existed. Soggin comments that “in Chronicles we have a series of notes from a reliable source, perhaps even at first hand, which complement what we know only partially from the books of Samuel and Kings.”
The fact that the Chronicler used Samuel-Kings as a source for his work does not mean that he slavishly followed it. Chronicles is not an exposition of Samuel-Kings, nor does it have the same structure. It is a separate work with an independent purpose.
Basing himself broadly on a variety of Old Testament traditions, the Chronicler, with considerable literary skill, drafted his history, building upon Samuel-Kings and interpreting, supplementing, and deleting as he felt compelled by his own theological perspectives. His intention was not to rewrite the history of Judah nor to gather what had not been covered by his predecessors, but it was to provide lessons for the people of his time drawn from the history of his people. The speeches of David in 1 Chronicles 22; 28–29, the speech of Abijah in 2 Chronicles 13, and the account of Uzziah’s prosperity and punishment in 2 Chronicles 26 reflect a common point of view that we may identify as that of the Chronicler.
He made use of a variety of exegetical techniques such as harmonization, typology, and explanation of difficult passages by appeal to other passages. He was not attempting, however, simply to expound his source material in its own right. He did not use all the source material available but made a selective use of Samuel and Kings. He was intent on presenting some theological perspectives from the written sources that were available. More of these were at hand than some modern writers allow in their tendency to propose later additions. The Chronicler saw patterns that were repeated at various points in Israel’s history, for example, the pattern of the “exile” and “restoration” motif exemplified in 1 Chronicles 10, with the death of Saul leaving Israel totally defeated and in a state of “exile” from which only the faithfulness of a David could rescue them. Another discernible motif was that of “all Israel” (to be discussed later). In presenting these patterns, the Chronicler used without distinction biblical sources, other materials, and his own personal composition in the interests of a wider purpose.
The Chronicler was highly skilled in composition, being able to shape material within a shorter narrative unit to make it serve a wider purpose. Examples of this are the growing support shown for David before and at his coronation at Hebron (1 Chr 11–12) and patterning the transition of rule from David to Solomon after the transition from Moses to Joshua (1 Chr 22; 28–29). He was able to use his sources creatively and utilize them to teach the developing community of Israel important principles that had guided his nation in the past and were still relevant for Israel in the future.


4. The Literary Forms in Chronicles

Chronicles contains a wide variety of literary forms, but four deserve special mention: (1) genealogies, such as chaps. 1–8; (2) lists, such as 1 Chr 9:3–23; 11:10–17; 12; (3) speeches, sermons, and prayers, such as 1 Chronicles 22; 28–29; (4) a miscellaneous group of literary forms comprising extracts from Samuel-Kings. These forms were often related verbatim but sometimes with alterations, additions, and deletions that reflected the mind of the Chronicler himself as he sought in yet other ways to use his sources to give expression to his special theological concerns.


(1) Genealogies

The fact that the author of 1 and 2 Chronicles devoted nine chapters out of sixty-five to genealogies (1 Chr 1–9) makes clear that these were of great importance to him and bear significantly on his purpose in writing his work. This purpose needs to be understood by any commentator who would elucidate the nature of these volumes.
We may define a genealogy as “a written or oral expression of the descent of a person or persons from an ancestor or ancestors.” They may display breadth (“These were the sons of Israel: Reuben, Simeon, Levi, Judah,” 1 Chr 2:1) and depth (the sons of Solomon: “Rehoboam, Abijah his son, Asa his son,” 1 Chr 3:10). This latter genealogy and others of its type that display depth alone are termed “linear.” Biblical genealogies, like the extrabiblical ones, are normally quite limited in depth, rarely extending beyond ten or twelve generations but often from four to six. In 1 Chronicles 2–9 we have an exception. Perhaps the writer sometimes joined separate genealogies.
If a genealogy displays breadth as well as depth, it is termed “segmented,” or “mixed.” In Chronicles multiple descendants of an ancestor are frequently named, but not all the lives are pursued to later generations. Genealogies may proceed from parent to child (descending, as in 1 Chr 9:39–44) or from child to parent (ascending, as in 1 Chr 9:14–16).
The two types of genealogy, linear and segmented, serve different purposes. The linear genealogy seeks to legitimize an individual by relating him to an ancestor whose status is established. The segmented genealogy is designed to express relationships between the various branches of a family. These relationships may be of a domestic, political, or religious kind, areas that are multiple or interpenetrating. These kinship relationships are variously expressed. (1) The most common is, “The descendants of X, Y his son, Z his son,” and so on (1 Chr 3:10–14). (2) A second way of expressing relationship is “X begat [caused to bring forth] Y.” Of the same general type is “X gave birth to Y,” where the emphasis is on the mother. In the same group we should include “the father of” (1 Chr 2:49). (3) “X the son of Y” is ascending order. (4) “X, his son Y” is descending order (1 Chr 3:10–14; 7:25–27).
These genealogies performed several functions. They were used to demonstrate existing relations between Israel and neighboring tribes with whom there was some degree of kinship. They also demonstrated relationships between Israel and isolated traditional elements by creating a coherent and inclusive genealogical system. At times they provided a continuity over periods of time not covered by material in the traditions. The genealogies also allowed for chronological speculation concerning world cycles. Some genealogies were military in content and purpose. They demonstrated the legitimacy of individuals in their office and provided individuals of rank with connections to a worthy family or individual in the past. Taken as a whole, they provided support for the “all Israel” concept so important to the Chronicler. Finally, they exhibited a sense of movement in Israel’s history toward a divine goal. The course of history was shown to be governed by the providence of God.
The genealogies of 1 Chronicles 1–9 are designed to demonstrate the relationships that existed between the various components of the people of Israel in the past and the people who claimed to be part of Israel at the time of the writer of Chronicles. Concepts such as “your father’s household” (Gen 12:1), representing the extended family; the “clan,” roughly equivalent to our “relatives”; and the “tribe,” of which, originally, Israel contained twelve, were all important in Israel and feature in the genealogies. At times these family structures are well marked, as in the family of Achan in Josh 7:16–18.
Important in interpreting the genealogies is recognizing that they reflect not only blood relationships but geographical, social, economic, religious, and political realities as well. Not all these are expressed at one time. The relationship changes from time to time. That is, there is a fluidity in their mode of expression. Thus theoretically Israel consisted of twelve tribes in the canonical tradition. But there were variations. The tribe of Joseph became divided into Ephraim and Manasseh. Levi is at times not counted. Simeon was absorbed by Judah. Dan and Zebulun, although listed in 1 Chr 2:1–2, are virtually neglected in the rest of chaps. 1–9. At times additional names could be added and others deleted. A name may lose its functional importance or reflect changes in the structure of the lineage. Names may be integrated into a genealogy not formerly included. Examples of all these and others can be found in Chronicles and from time to time will be referred to in this commentary.
The source of this genealogical information is not always clear to us. It is too simplistic a solution to propose that the Chronicler, or someone else, concocted a genealogy. Even in the twentieth century tribal peoples trace their family for many generations through oral memories. Also there were written records that could be consulted, although the Chronicler’s sources have not always survived.


(2) Lists

Chronicles contains sufficient lists to group them together as a recognizable literary form. Among these was the list of the people of Judah, Benjamin, Ephraim, and Manasseh; leaders of fathers’ houses; priests, Levites and gatekeepers; the list of those who resettled on their own lands after exile (1 Chr 9:3–23); the chiefs of David’s mighty men (1 Chr 11:10–47); the warriors who joined David at Ziklag, at his stronghold in the desert; men of Manasseh who defected to David, and men who came to David at Hebron (1 Chr 12); and others. The sources from which these lists derived are quite unknown to us. Possibly they were preserved in temple lists, but they evidently were accessible to the Chronicler and served an important function in the Chronicler’s overall purpose.


(3) Speeches, Sermons, and Prayers

At several points in Chronicles the speeches of kings and others are recorded, for example, speeches of David and Solomon and various utterances from the later kings of Judah. Some of these might easily be regarded as sermons. In other areas prayers are recorded, for example, Solomon’s prayer of dedication before the altar of the temple in front of the whole assembly of Israel (2 Chr 6:14–42) and Jehoshaphat’s prayer on the occasion of the attack by the troops of Ammon, Moab, and Mount Seir (2 Chr 20:6–12).


(4) Prophetic Utterances of “Minor Prophets”

A succession of prophets in Israel delivered God’s word to the people at different times. We do not have a literary record of their utterances like the classical prophets in the Bible, but the Chronicler had access to their words. Among these were Nathan (1 Chr 17:1–14), Gad (1 Chr 21:9–19; and see esp. 29:29), Shemaiah (2 Chr 11:2–4), Azariah (2 Chr 15:2–7), and Hanani (2 Chr 16:7–9).


(5) The Levitical Sermons

Some scholars have isolated a particular literary form that has been called “The Levitical Sermon,” so named by G. von Rad. This is a prose form in which a confessional statement is made with a quotation from the canonical prophets in support (2 Chr 15:2–7; 16:7–9; 19:6–7; 20:15–17, 20; 29:5–11). This literary form is widely accepted by scholars as a genuine form, but some have thought it to be a rather artificial idea. A modern commentator like H. G. M. Williamson refers to it frequently.


(6) Psalms and Poetry

While in general, poetry is not a literary feature of Chronicles, it is not entirely lacking. David’s psalm of thanks in 1 Chr 16:7–36 is a notable example. The list of names in 1 Chr 25:4–5 has been identified as poetic in form (see commentary). Snatches of psalm verses also are here and there in these books.


5. The Authorship and Unity of Chronicles

In the study of the Books of Chronicles commentators frequently have postulated that behind this work lie the efforts and ingenuity of an individual we can call the Chronicler. While this is a reasonable position, a number of questions have arisen. What was the extent of the Chronicler’s work? Was he responsible also for the whole or part of the books of Ezra and Nehemiah as well as Chronicles? In particular regard to the books of Chronicles themselves, to what extent are they a unity, or is there evidence of secondary material within the books of Chronicles? The decisions arrived at in regard to these issues will profoundly affect the interpretation of the material that lies before the commentator on the books of Chronicles.


(1) The Relation of Chronicles to Ezra-Nehemiah

The view that the books of Chronicles are directly continued in the books of Ezra and Nehemiah and that the same author was responsible for them has been regarded as scholarly orthodoxy for well over a century. Indeed the view of the Talmud and church fathers was that Ezra was the author. S. R. Driver prepared a list of characteristic vocabulary that is prominent in Chronicles, Ezra, and Nehemiah, suggesting that they were authored by one person.
In recent years that view has been challenged by scholars such as S. Japhet  and H. G. M. Williamson. Japhet noted four phenomena that were used to argue for common authorship: (1) the presence of the opening verses of Ezra at the end of Chronicles; (2) the fact that 1 Esdras begins with 2 Chronicles 35–36 and continues through Ezra; (3) common vocabulary, style, and syntax; and (4) uniform theological ideas expressed in the material and its selection. While it may be admitted that a number of themes and a good deal of common vocabulary, style, and syntax are common to Chronicles and Ezra-Nehemiah, important differences exist in theological themes, such as the doctrine of retribution and the assessment of Solomon. In the matter of vocabulary, style, and syntax much of this was simply characteristic of postexilic Hebrew as a whole. But a close study of the vocabulary lists of Chronicles and Ezra-Nehemiah reveals significant differences of usage between the two bodies of writing. The Ezra-Nehemiah work has problems of its own, but at no point are these dependent on the books of Chronicles, which, for its part, can be well understood as a work in its own right.


(2) The Unity of Chronicles

A further question needs to be raised, namely, the question of internal unity. Various approaches to this question have been made. Some scholars have argued that Chronicles has been subjected to a measure of secondary editing. For example, 1 Chronicles 1–9 is held by some writers as entirely secondary to the original work. Others see in Chronicles essentially the work of a single author that has been subjected to a wide variety of later additions. Others have proposed three separate editions of the Chronicler’s work that they have named Chronicles 1, Chronicles 2, Chronicles 3. The commentary of Williamson to which we have referred presents a moderate view. He regards Chronicles as a substantial unity including 1 Chronicles 1–9. He rejects many of the secondary additions proposed by other writers. He does allow, however, some cases of secondary expansion of the Chronicler’s work by a priestly reviewer as in 1 Chronicles 15–16 and 23–27 and a few other less extensive passages.
While some relatively slight redaction of the Chronicler’s work may be allowed, a wholesale editing of the Chronicler’s text is not warranted. Where it is allowed, it needs to be based on internal literary-critical considerations and not on speculative theories.
We might add that the Chronicler structures his work very carefully. L. C. Allen has isolated three types of literary design. First, the Chronicler often used an inclusio pattern to define the limits of a text, as in 2 Chr 29:2 and 31:20. Second, he often used recurring motifs; and third, he often used contrasting motifs. All of these are evident in the Hebrew text.


6. The Historical Situation of the Chronicler

By the time the Chronicler wrote, much had happened in Israel’s history. From the tribal days of the Judges, through the period of the establishment of the United Kingdom under David and Solomon (ca. 1000–931 B.C.), through the schism after Solomon’s death and the period of the Divided Kingdom (931–722 B.C.), and on through the period of the kingdom of Judah (722–587 B.C.), the people of Israel had experienced many vicissitudes including two major political tragedies. The destruction of the Northern Kingdom as a separate political entity and the exile of many of its people at the hands of the Assyrian ruler Sargon II (721–705 B.C.) or perhaps Shalmaneser V (726–722 B.C.) took place in the late summer or autumn of the year 722/721 B.C. After that, the Southern Kingdom, Judah, survived as the sole representative of the people of Israel until it too, after surviving 134 years, came to an end in July 587 and more of the people of old Israel went into exile.
Politically the old Israel had ceased to exist. But in God’s mind there was more to its story yet to unfold. The great empires of Assyria and Babylonia passed from the stage of history. During their period of ascendancy, numbers of God’s people languished in a foreign land. Some, of course, never left their homeland. But in 539 B.C. Cyrus, ruler of Persia, overthrew Babylon. In the first year of his reign in Babylon, in 538 B.C., he issued a decree ordering the restoration of the Jewish community and its cult in Palestine (Ezra 1:2–4; 6:3–5). The exiles were free to return, and many did, although some stayed in Babylonia.
When they returned, there were years of hardship and frustration ahead of them. The community was at first very small, perhaps only twenty thousand. It was to be a “day of small things” (Zech 4:10). Jerusalem was still thinly populated seventy-five years later (Neh 7:4). The land at the disposal of the Jews was tiny (about twenty-five miles from north to south); there was no temple. The newcomers faced years of privation and insecurity. They experienced poor seasons, partial crop failures (Hag 1:9–11; 2:15–17). Nor is it likely that Jews who were still resident in the land in every case welcomed the influx of immigrants with enthusiasm. They had regarded the land as theirs (Ezek 33:24). Their neighbors, especially the aristocracy of Samaria, resented the limitation of their prerogatives there and were openly hostile. To aggravate matters the returning exiles considered themselves as the true Israel and tended to separate themselves both from the Samaritans and their less orthodox brethren as from men unclean (Hag 2:10–14).
In addition to these physical problems, a real spiritual emergency existed in the community. The morale of the community was dangerously low as revealed in Haggai and Zechariah. The second temple was built by March 515 and dedicated with great rejoicing (Ezra 6:13–18). David’s throne, however, was not reestablished. Among the returning exiles questions arose about the legitimacy of the membership of individuals in the community of Israel. Men of spiritual insight like the Chronicler had even deeper concerns—the spiritual health of the community and the proper recognition of Jerusalem as the authentic place of worship. The returnees were the legitimate successors of the people of Judah. But the issue was wider in the Chronicler’s view with his concept of “all Israel.” He needed to demonstrate by resort to genealogical records the total composition of Israel—not merely Judah and the returning exiles but legitimate descendants of the authentic Israel both north and south. He also needed to establish the legitimacy of the priests and Levites from the extant genealogies of which, it seems, there were many.


7. The Date of Chronicles

As did many other biblical authors, the Chronicler left few clues to help us date his work with any certainty. We can set some upper and lower limits and propose that the date of Chronicles lies within these limits. Thus the reference in 2 Chr 36:20 to the “the kingdom of Persia” coming to power sets 539 B.C. as the earliest possible date. The latest possible date is 180 B.C. Eupolemos, a Greek writer, quoted from the LXX of Chronicles about the middle of the second century B.C. Ben Sira, a scholar and teacher living in Jerusalem, published his book (Sirach) about 180 B.C. It was taken by his grandson to Egypt and translated into Greek. The description of King David in Sirach (47:8–10) seems to be based on Chronicles. This would exclude a Maccabean date for Chronicles. This provides at best a date somewhere within a 350 year period.
Yet commentators have proposed a wide variety of dates within these limits. Those who regard Chronicles as having been written by the author of Ezra-Nehemiah date the book to the Persian period on the basis of the Aramaic of Ezra as compared to that of the Elephantine material. While there is no consensus about the exact date, a number of scholars incline towards the fourth century B.C.


8. Important Theological Themes

Some writers frankly consider Chronicles to be an inferior piece of work. Pfeiffer claimed that it was an inferior supplement to the priestly code and commented that “the Chronicler made no important contributions to theological thought.” D. Howard, on the other hand, begins his treatment of Chronicles by saying, “The books of Chronicles are Wonderful,” and that the theological message of Chronicles is very relevant to our time. In fact, the intention of the Chronicler was neither to rewrite the history of Judah, nor to supplement the so-called P document, nor to gather together what had been omitted by his predecessors. He had to deal with the pressing theological issues of his day. One of the problems of the restored community was to delineate the precise extent of those who could rightly be counted as legitimate members of God’s people. For that reason care was taken to legitimize an individual in terms of his family tree. In this a genealogy was of enormous importance. The same search for legitimacy was a concern of priests and Levites who also sought legitimacy in a genealogy. It was important for the Chronicler to develop his concept of “all Israel,” which we will discuss in due course.
But there was something more important than physical descent and biological relationship. The Chronicler attempted to interpret to the restored community in Jerusalem the history of Israel as the working out of the eternal covenant between God and the people that demanded an obedient response to the divine law. Using David as a model he could show that Israel prospered when it was obedient but came under divine judgment when it abandoned God’s law (2 Chr 36:15–19). After the judgment God once again restored his people, who continued to stand under the divine imperatives.
The Chronicler’s theology was not basically at variance with that of other biblical writers though there were variations on some themes and certainly different emphases. Writing in the latter part of the Old Testament period the Chronicler was heir to most of the traditions which form Old Testament thought. He did not set out to write a systematic presentation of all that had gone before but assumed a knowledge of much of Israel’s history and thought. His own thought emerges in the course of his work. Indeed, there is a certain artificiality in attempting even the degree of systematization which we shall now undertake.


(1) “All Israel”

The Chronicler viewed the whole nation, both north and south together, as the people of God and referred on numerous occasions to “all Israel.” At the time of his writing, a major issue was the composition of the restored exiles in relation to the people of Israel. There was even some disagreement about how “open” or how “exclusive” the official stand should be. But for the Chronicler there was no problem. His presumption was that Israel, the people of God, was made up of those who formed part of “all Israel,” which included both north and south.
He opens his book with a genealogical portrayal of Israel in its ideal extent of twelve tribes. The first nine chapters are not to be viewed as a later addition to the work but as an essential part of a whole argument. The line of God’s election of his people is traced directly from Adam to the “sons of Israel” (Jacob) in 1:1–2:1. Jacob, the father of the tribal ancestors, is always called “Israel” in Chronicles and is given a prominence that is virtually unique in the Old Testament. In chaps. 2–8 the descendants of Jacob are presented in their various tribal groups by means of genealogical tables. They are organized around the primary groups of the community (Judah, Benjamin, and Levi), which act as a framework for the other tribes. The final chapter (1 Chr 9) focuses on the postexilic Jerusalem community. The genealogy of Saul is presented at the end of chap. 9 as an introduction to Israel’s line of kings. The total introduction in chaps. 1–9 is an essential part of the whole picture of Israel, the people of God.
As the story unfolds, the Chronicler is at great pains to show that “all Israel” accepted the kingship of both David and Solomon. “All Israel” came together to David at Hebron (1 Chr 11:1). It was David and “all Israel” who proceeded to Jerusalem to take the city (1 Chr 11:4). The “all-Israel” theme seems to lie behind the various lists of chaps. 11–12, for representatives of the various tribes were involved. “All Israel” was involved in the transfer of the ark to Jerusalem (1 Chr 13:1–6; 15:3; 16:3). All of Israel’s officials were present when David made his speech to Solomon (1 Chr 28:1). When Solomon became king, “all Israel” gave their unanimous support (29:21–26). “All Israel” was present at the dedication of the temple (2 Chr 7:8).
In the period after Solomon we catch glimpses of the same motif. Rehoboam appeared before “all Israel” at Shechem to be made king (2 Chr 10:1). In the period after Solomon’s death there is some variety in the use of the terms “Israel” and “all Israel.” Both are used for the northern tribes (2 Chr 13:4–5, 15, 18), and in 2 Chr 24:5–6 the term “all Israel” refers to portions of the south. It is not possible to follow this question through within the scope of this commentary. But throughout 1 Chronicles 10 to 2 Chronicles 36 various southern kings are pictured as active in the north both in warfare and in religious activities (2 Chr 13:18; 15:8; 17:2; 31:1; 34:6). On the other hand, there was religious contact between north and south at times when people from the north came to worship at Jerusalem (2 Chr 11:16; 15:9–10; 30:11, 18, 21, 25).
Some of the Chronicler’s readers might have thought that when the schism came after Solomon’s death the unity of Israel was lost forever. The Chronicler, however, was at pains to show that the division did not mean that either north or south was irretrievably divided from the other, certainly not from a religious point of view. The northern tribes did not forfeit their position as children of Israel even if they were people who had “forsaken” Yahweh. They could be restored and could return by way of repentance (2 Chr 13:4–12). Actually, the southern tribes also fell away at times and were restored after repentance.
But evidence that the division was not irretrievable came from the fact that in the days of Hezekiah the whole population was reunited in worship at Jerusalem when a Davidic king was on the throne. Hezekiah was something like a second Solomon. Even in preexilic times there had been a reunification of the people of Israel, a foretaste of that of which the prophets spoke (Ezek 37:15–23). The repeated thrust of the Chronicler’s work was that north and south, “all Israel,” ought to be and finally would be one in a unity based on their common worship of Yahweh centered in the Jerusalem temple.


(2) The Temple and Worship

Obviously one of the Chronicler’s central concerns was the temple of Jerusalem and the worship conducted there. It was incumbent on all who were members of the family of Israel that they loyally adhered to the temple cult. The sin of Jeroboam I was that he neglected his adherence to the temple in Jerusalem and replaced it by another loyalty. King Abijah of Judah gave full expression to the fact that the worship of the temple made exclusive demands on all who claimed to be a member of Israel (2 Chr 13:10–12).
Another aspect of the temple and its worship was the importance of a Davidic king for the successful maintenance of the temple cult. David and Solomon were of focal significance in the building of the temple and in the establishment of its rituals. Generally speaking, as the reigns of Hezekiah and Josiah demonstrate and as the careful preparations to restore Joash to the Davidic kingship show, the Chronicler believed that a Davidic king was necessary for the successful maintenance of the temple cult. On great occasions such as the dedication of the temple, the Passover of Hezekiah, and the Passover of Josiah, the contribution of the king was considerable, and the Chronicler pointed out this fact.
The last four kings of Israel brought the king and the temple together in an interesting way. When the Lord’s judgment fell finally on Judah, the Chronicler focused his interest on the punishment of the king personally and on the plundering of the temple (2 Chr 36).
Some writers have wanted to portray the place of the high priest in postexilic times in an exalted position. But it is striking how little attention the Chronicler gives to the role of high priest. The most distinguished of all the high priests was Jehoiada, but he is singled out because he worked for the restoration of the Davidic monarchy at a time when it was under great threat (2 Chr 23–24). For the Chronicler the Davidic king was necessary for the successful maintenance of the temple cult and could not be replaced by the high priest.
Another important observation is that the Chronicler did not at any stage seek to supercede the Mosaic rituals that were ordered in conformity with the prescriptions of the Pentateuch. Sacrifices and festivals were conducted according to the law. Yet the Chronicler had an appreciation of historical development. He saw the need of redefining the tasks of the Levites once the significance of the ark and tabernacle had been taken over by the temple.
Finally, the Chronicler was not a strict and unyielding ritualist. He stressed the note of great joy at the conclusion of nearly all major religious celebrations. Joyless ritualism was not characteristic of him (1 Chr 29:22; 2 Chr 7:8–10; 30:21–26). Further, in a number of passages he put considerable emphasis on faith in God as the way to blessing but rarely on ritual perfection.


(3) The Concept of Kingship

We have just observed that the king was important in the leadership of and provision for the temple cult although there were strict limits on the part the king could play in the ritual. But in the Chronicler’s concept of kingship in Israel were some more general aspects.
Kingship in Israel could be equated with the kingdom of God. King David addressing the officials in Israel about the future, declared that God had chosen Solomon to sit upon the throne of the kingdom of the Lord over Israel (1 Chr 28:5). In due course Solomon sat on the throne of the Lord as king after his father (1 Chr 29:23). Abijah rebuked Jeroboam I for planning to resist “the kingdom of the Lord which is in the hands of David’s descendants” (2 Chr 13:8). There is a view of kingship in Israel being expressed in such passages that is extremely high. It is expressed in different terms in other passages. In 1 Chr 17:14 God speaks of “my house” and “my kingdom” through the prophet Nathan, who conveyed the divine word to David. In 2 Chr 9:8 the queen of Sheba tells Solomon that God has “placed you on his throne as king to rule for the LORD your God.” The import of these passages is that God’s kingship was exercised in Israel through human representatives chosen by God himself. As a consequence Israel’s kingdom was secure and everlasting because it was in God’s hands. In the Chronicler’s thinking there was a continuity of kingship in Israel since it was grounded in God himself. If there were a change in the earthly kingship, God had the matter in hand. He could “turn the kingdom over to David” in order to rescue Israel after Saul’s death (1 Chr 10:14).
In fact, kingship was entrusted to David and his dynasty. Nathan made the promise to David at God’s bidding that his throne would be established forever (1 Chr 17:13; cf. 2 Chr 13:5; 21:7; 23:3). This is more than a nostalgia for the good old days; it is a theological assertion that the house of David is for all time the only legitimate ruling house over Israel.
Inevitably, once the Davidic dynasty was firmly established there could have been a minimizing of the earlier exodus and Sinai traditions. But the Chronicler did not allow the idea of a Davidic covenant to push aside the fundamental importance of the Mosaic covenant that was basic for Israel’s self-understanding (1 Chr 17:20–22). If need be, both of the two covenants had to be held in tension. The covenantal basis for Israel’s existence, harking back to the Sinai covenant, needed to be held alongside the new Davidic covenant. Israel’s roots ran back to Sinai. Their continuing existence was to be under the kingship of God exercised through the human representative of his choice. The Chronicler wrote at a time when Israel had a temple but no king. His lessons from history were to demonstrate that God had not abandoned his people—he was present among them and the future was open before them. Because of the biblical covenants they could have a legitimate hope in God’s work on their behalf. A glorious future lay ahead, although the Chronicler was content to point only to its foundations.


(4) Retribution and Repentance

One of the striking features of the Chronicler’s theology is his attempt to correlate blessing with faithfulness and judgment with disobedience. He returned to the theme time and again, and almost every interpreter at some point reckons with this theological axiom in Chronicles.
It was specially applicable to the kings of Judah. Where a king demonstrates faithfulness to Yahweh and his covenant, he is rewarded in standard ways—success in building and military operations, the blessing of a large family, wealth, respect from his own subjects, and the respect of foreign nations. By contrast a king who “forsakes” God suffers military defeat, sickness, conspiracy, lack of loyalty from his own subjects, and lack of respect from foreigners. The Chronicler goes even further than the writers of Samuel and Kings. A good illustration of his method is seen in the case of King Saul, who “died because he was unfaithful to the LORD; he did not keep the word of the LORD and even consulted a medium for guidance, and did not inquire of the LORD. So the LORD put him to death and turned the kingdom over to David son of Jesse” (1 Chr 10:13–14). This is the negative expression of the doctrine. On the positive side Solomon was urged to “acknowledge the God of your father, and serve him with wholehearted devotion and with a willing mind.… If you seek him, he will be found by you; but if you forsake him, he will reject you forever” (1 Chr 28:9).
The doctrine has sometimes been called the doctrine of “immediate retribution,” which is to state it too exactly. Sometimes the retribution is delayed for a period. The possibility of repentance (2 Chr 7:14), which averted or at least moderated the threatened judgment, always was present. In this passage God’s people are exhorted to humble themselves, to pray, to seek God’s face, and to turn from their wicked ways. In such cases God would hear from heaven, forgive their sin, and heal their land. To the Chronicler’s mind God was more willing to bless than to bring judgment on his people. In addition, the Chronicler’s doctrine was not a facile theology of the sort associated with Job’s three friends. He knew that there were exceptions, and he told of some of these.
One other facet of his doctrine of retribution is important. God gives a warning through a prophet before judgment falls. Often such a warning led to repentance as in the case of the prophet Shemaiah, who warned Rehoboam and the leaders of Judah of the approach of Pharaoh Shishak. As a result, they humbled themselves and said, “The LORD is just,” so the sentence was lessened (2 Chr 12:5–12). Other examples will be given in the course of the commentary. In cases where the prophetic warning went unheeded, judgment fell as in the case of King Asa’s rejection of the word of the prophet Hanani (2 Chr 16:7–10; cf. 24:19–22; 25:15–16; 26:16–21). Any doctrine of retribution in the Chronicler must therefore be removed from a purely mechanical sphere. God was compassionate (36:15–16). There was truth in a doctrine of divine judgment on evildoers, but there was truth also in a doctrine of repentance. Each individual had to answer to God for his own misdeeds. The present generation need not be heir to the judgments on their predecessors. The Chronicler’s doctrine of retribution and repentance leaves the way open to future hope and blessing. For Israel there was always hope for a restoration of one people united under one king around one temple. A responsive faith arising out of repentance will call down the mercy of God (2 Chr 20:20).


(5) The Response of the People

The Chronicler’s belief in the importance of repentance naturally led him to assert the importance of the spiritual attitudes of the heart. While the Chronicler stressed the importance of the temple rituals, the offering of sacrifices, the observance of the festivals like the Passover, the bringing of contributions to the temple, and the keeping of the law, it was not sufficient for God’s people merely to observe the letter of the law. A deeper spiritual response was just as important, if not more so, than purely legal requirements. Three important attitudes were expected in Israel—not merely obedience but obedience with a perfect heart (1 Chr 28:9; 29:9, 17); not merely contributions to the temple for its repair and upkeep and the support of its personnel but willing contributions (1 Chr 29:1–9, 14, 17); and not merely temple rituals but ritual participation with joy (1 Chr 29:9, 17, 22).
These emphases are made somewhat sparsely in 1 Chronicles because the subject matter does not lend itself so readily to them (although 1 Chr 29 stresses these themes). They are, however, prominent throughout 2 Chronicles. In later areas of 2 Chronicles the phrases “with a perfect heart” and “with all the heart” are used twenty-one times of kings whose conduct won the Chronicler’s approval, for example, Asa (2 Chr 15:17), Hezekiah (2 Chr 31:21), and Josiah (2 Chr 34:31). It is surprising that the Chronicler did not state explicitly that David and Solomon were perfect in Yahweh’s service, although this is implied.
The characteristic of joy is evident in the disposition of the people as they rendered their service, noted in 1 Chr 12:38–40, first of all, where it marks the mood of the people making their contributions to the temple and at the feast accompanying Solomon’s coronation. The theme does occur elsewhere, but Chronicles employs the root śmḥ (“be glad, rejoice”) some fifteen times. It reflects the mood both of the Levites and singers in the temple services (1 Chr 15:16; 2 Chr 23:18; 29:30) and particularly of the people in various kinds of cultic activity (2 Chr 7:10; 15:15; 24:10; 29:36; 30:21, 23, 25). The Chronicler showed his own joy in such ceremonies.
A closely related emphasis is the generosity of the people and its leaders in their support of the monarchy and the cult. This generosity is shown on the occasion of the recognition of David as king over all Israel at Hebron (1 Chr 12:38–40). It is described in 1 Chr 29:1–9 when the people gave freely and wholeheartedly to the Lord as they brought their gifts for the building of the temple. Again, on the occasion of Hezekiah’s reform (2 Chr 31:2–13) the people brought “heaps” of gifts. Further evidence of the generosity of kings and princes is furnished on the occasion of major feasts and reform movements (2 Chr 29:20–24, 31–35; 30:24–25; 31:4–10; 35:7–9).
We sense the enthusiastic support, the great joy, and the willing generosity shown by everyone—king, leaders, temple personnel, and people—on such occasions. This is a far cry from a barren legalism. It is an evidence of the disposition of the hearts of people who are involved at a deep level in the worship of Yahweh.


(6) The Chronicler and Messianism

In view of the discussion on “Retribution and Repentance,” we have argued that the Chronicler had an eye for the future. By his understanding of the united monarchy of David and Solomon, the Chronicler intended his readers to understand that the dynasty had been eternally established.
The content of God’s promise to David was not exhausted with Solomon’s building of the temple (2 Chr 7). In fact, the completion of the temple was only a factor in the establishment of the promise. The variation of the Chronicler’s account of Solomon’s dedicatory prayer in 2 Chr 6:41–42 from that recorded in 1 Kings 8 reemphasizes the imperialist interpretation of the promise to David. The passage refers to the Davidic dynasty rather than to the people as a whole. Again, in 2 Chr 13:5–8 the speech of Abijah in vv. 5–12 reflects the Chronicler’s viewpoint. “The kingdom of the LORD is in the hands of David’s descendants” (v. 8). It was useless for the rebellious northerners to withstand Davidic rule. Another passage, 2 Chr 21:7, stresses the permanence of the house of David. Likewise, according to 2 Chr 23:3 when Jehoiada presented the king’s son Joash to the people, he declared, “The king’s son shall reign, as the LORD promised concerning the descendants of David.”
In these instances it is clear that the house of David survived three critical situations. The promise to David, confirmed by the obedience of his son Solomon, was of eternal validity. The Chronicler had evidence from the nation’s past and was therefore able to pass on a continuing tradition of hope, centered on the Davidic family. How far into the future this hope continued is not spelled out. It was not “messianic” in the strict sense of the word or in the manner conceived of in other parts of the Old Testament (notably by some of the prophets, e.g., Isa 9:6–7; 11:1–10; and elsewhere). He did not look into the distant future for the fulfillment of a vision in which Jerusalem would be seen as the center of the world governed by Israel to which the nations were welcomed (Isa 2:1–4). But he did have a “royalist” hope and presented a “realized or inaugurated eschatology,” that is, as far as the story had unfolded in his day. The future still lay open, as Jehoshaphat had declared in the Desert of Tekoa on the day he was attacked by the Moabites, the Edomites, and the Meunites (2 Chr 20:1). “Listen to me, Judah and people of Jerusalem! Have faith in the LORD your God and you will be upheld; have faith in his prophets and you will be successful.”
The fully developed doctrine of Messiah had to await the future, when Christian interpreters made much of the fulfillment of the Davidic hope in the person of Jesus Christ, the Messiah.


(7) The Repetition of Historical Patterns

In developing his story the Chronicler used models around which to shape his account of individual kings. Working on the basis of material that lay before him in the earlier records in Samuel and Kings but wishing to point up theological issues he wanted to make clear, he used the earlier records as models to lend support to his theological concerns. His methodology is pervasive, and one can identify his intentions in many areas. It is not possible within the scope of this book to develop the question in detail. It must suffice to illustrate by reference to Solomon, Jehoshaphat, and Hezekiah.
1. Solomon is seen as a second David. The succession from David to Solomon is patterned on the succession of Moses to Joshua. In the Chronicler’s distinctive treatment of Solomon, he omits a good deal of the unfavorable material found in Kings that might tarnish the image of both David and Solomon and portrays the glorious, obedient, all-conquering figures who enjoy both divine blessing and the total support of the people.
Solomon, like David, was king by divine choice. He enjoyed the complete and immediate support of all the people. Solomon, like David, had a profound concern for the cult, the temple, and its personnel. Solomon’s succession of David parallels with the example of Moses and Joshua. Numerous phrases in Deuteronomy and Joshua are paralleled in Chronicles.
The Chronicler also fashioned his account of Solomon as temple builder, with his helper Huram-Abi (2 Chr 4:16), on that of Bezalel, the tabernacle supervisor of building, and his helper Oholiab (Exod 36:1–2). Solomon is seen as the new Bezalel and Huram-Abi as the new Oholiab.
2. A second example of the Chronicler’s use of a model around which to shape his version of a particular reign is the use of Asa’s story as a paradigm for Jehoshaphat’s story. The Chronicler considerably expanded his account of the reign of Asa, and comparison of his accounts of Asa and Jehoshaphat will indicate that there are several strong parallels between the two reigns. Both were pious kings whose reigns followed similar patterns. Both kings enjoyed the rewards of their piety in building programs, peace, and large armies. God was with them both, and the fear of Yahweh was on the nations in their day. Also both were rebuked by prophets for foreign alliances.
3. For Hezekiah also the Chronicler used the model of David and Solomon. Under Hezekiah Israel was united under a Davidic king. Hezekiah showed a great concern for the temple and for its rituals (e.g., the Passover) and its personnel, the priests and Levites. He had enormous wealth. He received gifts from the nations. He did what was right in the eyes of Yahweh. His intercessory prayer at the Passover observance (2 Chr 30:18–20) recalls the prayer of Solomon at the temple dedication (2 Chr 6). For his fidelity Hezekiah enjoyed the blessing of God in the loyalty and support of his people, in the reunification of the nation, in his building projects, in the support of his people, in his military victories, and in his recognition among the nations. He is presented as almost as blameless as Solomon, although he had a proud spirit. Yet he repented and was therefore saved from the divine wrath (32:24–26).
The description of the models the Chronicler chose to portray Solomon, Jehoshaphat, and Hezekiah do not exhaust this theme. It was an important part of the Chronicler’s repertoire as he developed his theological emphasis.


(8) The Chronicler as an Exegete of Scripture and the Past

B. Childs has pointed out that the Chronicler’s work may be described as an exegesis of authoritative Scripture. He harmonized, supplemented, and looked for types and lessons. In his writings we see a kind of early example of how lessons may be drawn from Scripture and history for the modern reader. In so doing, he “bears witness to the unity of God’s will for his people,” and he points to the importance of Scripture in guiding the lives of the modern believer.


9. The Chronicler’s Theological Vocabulary

With his own specific interests in view, it was inevitable that the Chronicler should use a vocabulary that best served his purpose. An important feature of his treatment of the story of Israel was to demonstrate that not only the kings but often the people also had turned aside from their allegiance to Yahweh their God and had worshiped and served other gods. A particular group of words was regularly used to describe this apostasy. Another group of words was used to describe the response of those who were obedient to Yahweh or who returned to him after turning aside. A particular vocabulary also is used to describe the response of God to those who repented.


(1) Vocabulary of Apostasy

The verb māʿal (“to be unfaithful”) and its noun maʿal (“unfaithfulness”) occur frequently in Chronicles to describe how individual kings as well as the people and the priests had turned aside from their allegiance to Yahweh (verb: 1 Chr 5:25; 10:13; 2 Chr 12:2; 26:16, 18; 28:19, 22; 29:6; 30:7; 36:14; noun: 2 Chr 28:19; 29:19; 33:19; 36:14). In addition, commonly used phrases that form part of his vocabulary are “to do evil in the eyes of the LORD” and “to walk in the ways of the kings of Israel” (2 Chr 21:6; 28:2; 33:2, 22; 36:5, 9, 12).


(2) Vocabulary of Obedience

These experiences have a particular distinctiveness, often in sharp contrast to that used to describe those who were unfaithful. Typical phrases are “to do what was good and right in the eyes of the LORD his God,” “to walk in the ways of his father David” (2 Chr 17:3; 20:32; 24:2; 26:4; 27:2; 29:2; 34:2), “to humble oneself” (2 Chr 7:14; 12:6–7, 12; 30:11; 33:12; 34:27).
A significant passage that uses several of the Chronicler’s common phrases is the Lord’s reply to Solomon after the dedication of the temple in 2 Chr 7:14: “If my people, who are called by my name, will humble themselves and pray and seek my face and turn from their wicked ways, then will I hear from heaven and will forgive their sin and will heal their land.” This verse is of vital significance for the Chronicler’s theology. Four avenues of repentance are mentioned that will lead God to forgive and restore. Each of these is taken up at appropriate places in the later narrative of Chronicles, often in connection with one of the remarkable interventions of God. The verb “to humble oneself” occurs earlier in Chronicles in a theologically neutral sense (1 Chr 17:10; 18:1; 20:4), but later it is a key element on several occasions. It occurs four times in the account of Shishak’s invasion during the reign of Rehoboam (2 Chr 12:6–7, 12; 30:11; 33:12, 19, 23; 34:27; 36:12).
The verb pālal (“pray”) appears in several passages (2 Chr 32:20, 24; 33:13; cf. 1 Chr 17:25; 2 Chr 7:1). The verb is used more generally of “pray” in other contexts (1 Chr 17:25; 2 Chr 6:19–21, 24, 26, 32, 34, 38; 30:18; 32:20, 24; 33:13). The phrase “to seek God’s face,” “to seek God” also is used often by the Chronicler (2 Chr 11:16; 15:4, 15; 20:4). The same verb bqš (“to seek”) also is used in a more general sense (1 Chr 4:39; 14:8; 16:10–11). The verb šûb (“to turn”) frequently is used but with the theological significance “to turn from wicked ways.” It occurs in 2 Chr 15:4; 30:6, 9; 36:13. The combination of the verbs “pray” and “turn” occurs a number of times in Solomon’s prayer in 1 Chronicles 6, and this verse in 1 Chr 7:14 is God’s answer to Solomon’s prayer.


(3) Vocabulary of Divine Response

The divine promise for those who make the four responses of repentance in 7:14a is that God will “hear,” “forgive their sin,” and “heal their land,” a divine response of full restoration. The request that God would “forgive” occurs several times in Solomon’s prayer, and this verse in 2 Chr 7:14b gives the answer to that plea (2 Chr 6:21, 25, 27, 30, 39).
Another term that the Chronicler used some fifteen times, three times in the plural, is the Hebrew word ḥesed, variously translated as “love,” “kindness.” It occurs in the liturgical formula “for his love endures for ever” (1 Chr 16:34, 41; 2 Chr 5:13; 7:3, 6; 20:21), which the Chronicler frequently used. But the word is often used in contexts where a covenant is involved and denotes “loyalty.” Thus David sought to demonstrate “loyalty” to his covenant with Hanun, the Ammonite, who had shown “loyalty” to him (1 Chr 19:2). God showed covenant loyalty to David (2 Chr 1:8). Solomon’s prayer refers to the “covenant love” God showed to his servants (2 Chr 6:14). The term was evidently close to the Chronicler’s thinking about God. One fascinating use of this noun in the plural is that the Chronicler found it useful in three contexts. In his prayer in 2 Chronicles 6, Solomon concludes with the words: “Remember the great love [kindnesses] promised to David your servant” (2 Chr 6:42). Other aspects of the Chronicler’s vocabulary concern his description of the activities and personnel of the cult, but these are hardly distinctive of the Chronicler because they appear in other writers who referred to the religious life of Israel.
The purpose of Chronicles is intimately connected with the very reason we need to read and study it. In the words of S. Japhet: “The past is explained so that its institutions and religious principles become relevant to the present, and the ways of the present are legitimized anew by being connected to the prime source of authority—the formative period in the people’s past.”






1 Chronicles



I. GOD’S PEOPLE IN GOD’S WORLD (1:1–9:34)


1. The Genealogical Prologue from Adam to Israel (Jacob) (1:1–2:2)

This section may be regarded as a preamble to the main genealogy in 2:3–9:1. In 1:1–2:2 the name “Israel” does not appear. The nation yet to come into being was hidden within the general body of humankind. Meanwhile the genealogies of chaps. 1–9 pursue their way, giving a panorama of the human background out of which the people of Israel emerged. The nation yet to be born emerged in due course from the Semites, one of the three great families of humankind: the Japhethites, the Hamites, and the Semites.
The Chronicler established Israel’s place in the world through the lengthy genealogies of chaps. 1–9 so that his audience might understand anew their role among the nations. Their mission was universal in nature, enabling all peoples to know the Lord through God’s appointed means, the Jerusalem temple. It was temple more so than kingship that indicated the presence of God’s rule on earth. As long as there was the temple, Israel had its peculiar role among the nations.
The genealogies provided for the reconstituted Israel a sense of God’s universal and ongoing work in the world. This continuity of design fueled Israel’s ambition to be the holy vessel that God had envisioned for it (Exod 19). This same sense of continuity with God’s work through the ages motivated the apostles to found the church in the shadow of Israel’s religious tradition. But more importantly, it was the universal setting that explained the drive to bring the gospel to the Gentiles (Acts 13). God’s people whether in past generations or in the present have this same commission to reach beyond themselves with the gospel to all the peoples of God’s created world (Rom 1:16–17).
The main source of information for the Chronicler was the Book of Genesis. Following his usual pattern, he dealt first with what to him were secondary lines within the family of humankind: first the Japhethites (vv. 5–7), then the Hamites (vv. 8–16), and finally what to him was the major family—the Semites (vv. 17–27), narrowing down this family to Abraham and his sons (v. 28). From his sons Isaac and Ishmael came three lines of descendants. The family of Ishmael came first (vv. 29–31), then the family of Keturah, Abraham’s concubine (vv. 32–33), and finally the family of Sarah and her two descendants, Esau and Israel, the sons of Isaac (v. 34), the second of these being the most significant for the Chronicler. The descendants of Esau are then presented (vv. 35–37) and linked with the people of Seir (vv. 38–42) and the people of Edom (vv. 43–54). Only after these listings are completed does the Chronicler take up again the sons of Israel. But he had established links in a very broad sense with other branches of the human race.
We may ask why this book burdens the reader with seemingly endless genealogies. Perhaps the best answer is provided by M. Wilcock, who observes that the generations after the exile needed a sense of history and legitimacy. In other words, they needed roots. Using the analogy of a tree, Wilcock observes that the genealogies reach from the very deepest root—Adam—to the very topmost branches of the tree—people who were living in the Chronicler’s lifetime. With these roots God’s people knew who they were and how they were to live. They may have felt like the most insignificant of peoples (a small, backwater country in the great Persian Empire), but the genealogies served to remind them that they were not only a people with a rich history but that their history was God’s history.


(1) Adam to Noah’s Sons (1:1–4)

1 Adam, Seth, Enosh, 2 Kenan, Mahalalel, Jared, 3 Enoch, Methuselah, Lamech, Noah.

    4 The sons of Noah:
    Shem, Ham and Japheth.

The Chronicler proceeded directly from Adam to Noah by way of a bare list of names taken from Genesis 5 and in the same order.


(2) The Descendants of Japheth (1:5–7)

    5 The sons of Japheth:
    Gomer, Magog, Madai, Javan, Tubal, Meshech and Tiras.
    6 The sons of Gomer:
    Ashkenaz, Riphath and Togarmah.
    7 The sons of Javan:
    Elishah, Tarshish, the Kittim and the Rodanim.

The list follows Gen 10:2–4 with minor differences.
1:5–6 Following a number of Hebrew manuscripts, the LXX, the Vg, and Gen 10:3, the NIV reads “Riphath” (v. 6) for the MT dîpat. In Hebrew the r and the d are very similar.
1:7 The Rodanim were the inhabitants of Rhodes. Only Gomer and Javan are carried further due no doubt to the source. As L. C. Allen notes, the reference to Tarshish is one of seventeen names in chap. 1 that “recur in the Chronicler’s narratives of David and Solomon as subject to their control or influence” (cf. 2 Chr 9:21; also “Sheba” in vv. 9, 22, 32 and in 2 Chr 9:9). These may be hints of the significance the Chronicler placed on the united monarchy. As the theme of God’s kingdom as represented in the Davidic-Solomonic empire would resound with promise for the future (cf. 1 Chr 17:14; 28:5; Pss 2:8; 72:10), so it found quiet introduction in this first chapter.


(3) The Descendants of Ham (1:8–16)

8 The sons of Ham:
    Cush, Mizraim, Put and Canaan.
    9 The sons of Cush:
    Seba, Havilah, Sabta, Raamah and Sabteca.
    The sons of Raamah:
    Sheba and Dedan.
    10 Cush was the father of Nimrod, who grew to be a mighty warrior on earth.
    11 Mizraim was the father of the Ludites, Anamites, Lehabites, Naphtuhites, 12 Pathrusites, Casluhites (from whom the Philistines came) and Caphtorites.
    13 Canaan was the father of Sidon his firstborn, and of the Hittites, 14 Jebusites, Amorites, Girgashites, 15 Hivites, Arkites, Sinites, 16 Arvadites, Zemarites and Hamathites.

The individuals named are those of Gen 10:6–20.
1:10 Most of the additional material from Genesis has been omitted, although space is devoted to Nimrod, who is described as a mighty warrior on earth. This is equivalent to the Greek “tyrant” or “hero.” The reference to the mighty hunter of Gen 10:9 is omitted, although in the ancient Near East hunting was a sport of kings, and a powerful ruler also was a man of might and power because he subdued wild animals.
It would be interesting to know why the Chronicler, not usually including details about individuals, made an exception in the case of Nimrod. Perhaps in a world where powerful rulers were common, he wanted to show that the practice was ancient. It should be noted that it was Nimrod who founded the Mesopotamian cities which became the arch enemies of Israel. In his own day the Persians were powerful rulers. But the spiritual ancestors of David should remember God’s promise to him, “I will make your name like the names of the greatest men of the earth” (1 Chr 17:8). Greatness is in God’s hands to bestow, to deny, or to take away.
1:11–12 The Philistines were Israel’s archrivals over the centuries. Egypt, another nation in the background of Israel’s story, rates a mention here.
1:13 Among the descendants of Ham was Canaan, the father of several groups including the Hittites. These were not the Hittites of Asia Minor but a local West Asiatic group. It was from one of the sons of Heth that Abraham bought a burial place for Sarah (Gen 10:15; 23:3).


(4) The Descendants of Shem (1:17–27)

17 The sons of Shem:
    Elam, Asshur, Arphaxad, Lud and Aram.
    The sons of Aram:
    Uz, Hul, Gether and Meshech.
    18 Arphaxad was the father of Shelah, and Shelah the father of Eber.
    19 Two sons were born to Eber:
    One was named Peleg, because in his time the earth was divided; his brother was named Joktan.
    20 Joktan was the father of Almodad, Sheleph, Hazarmaveth, Jerah, 21 Hadoram, Uzal, Diklah, 22 Obal, Abimael, Sheba, 23 Ophir, Havilah and Jobab. All these were sons of Joktan.

    24 Shem, Arphaxad, Shelah,
    25 Eber, Peleg, Reu,
    26 Serug, Nahor, Terah
    27 and Abram (that is, Abraham).

1:17 The source of this material was Gen 10:21–29 but with some omissions, notably the phrase “the father of all the children of Eber, the elder brother of Japheth” (Gen 10:21, NRSV). We might have expected the Chronicler to emphasize the seniority of Shem among Noah’s sons in order to stress that the people of Israel had come from the Semitic branch of the human family. The Chronicler had his own reasons for this omission that are not clear to us.
1:18–27 The line of Shem is traced through Arphaxad, Shelah, Eber, and Peleg to Abram, that is, Abraham (v. 27), although Abraham was not nearly as significant to the Chronicler later in the story as Jacob (Israel).
The name “Abram” is preserved from Gen 11:26 as son of Terah along with Nahor and Haran. The shorter name Abram (ʾabram) is of uncertain meaning, though probably it means “the father is exalted.” The name rarely was used in the Old Testament. The name Abraham (ʾabrāhām) probably means “father of a multitude,” and from the late perspective of the Chronicler in this genealogical context it testified to the verity of God’s promises and to his faithfulness.


(5) The Descendants of Abraham (1:28–37)

28 The sons of Abraham:
    Isaac and Ishmael.
    29 These were their descendants:
    Nebaioth the firstborn of Ishmael, Kedar, Adbeel, Mibsam, 30 Mishma, Dumah, Massa, Hadad, Tema, 31 Jetur, Naphish and Kedemah. These were the sons of Ishmael.

    32 The sons born to Keturah, Abraham’s concubine:
    Zimran, Jokshan, Medan, Midian, Ishbak and Shuah.
    The sons of Jokshan:
    Sheba and Dedan.
    33 The sons of Midian:
    Ephah, Epher, Hanoch, Abida and Eldaah.
    All these were descendants of Keturah.

    34 Abraham was the father of Isaac.
    The sons of Isaac:
    Esau and Israel.
    35 The sons of Esau:
    Eliphaz, Reuel, Jeush, Jalam and Korah.
    36 The sons of Eliphaz:
    Teman, Omar, Zepho, Gatam and Kenaz;
    by Timna: Amalek.
    37 The sons of Reuel:
    Nahath, Zerah, Shammah and Mizzah.


ABRAHAM’S SONS (1:28)

1:28 Verses 24–27 trace the line of Shem to Abraham, but at v. 28 the Chronicler reaches the point he was aiming for with the person of Abraham. In a mere twenty-seven verses he is poised to take up the story of Abraham’s family, having traced the development of the human race from Adam to Noah to Abraham.


ABRAHAM’S DESCENDANTS THROUGH ISHMAEL (1:29–31)

1:29–31 After introducing Abraham’s two sons, Isaac and Ishmael, the Chronicler deals first with what to him were the secondary lines of descent from Abraham, namely, the descendants through Hagar (vv. 29–31) and through Keturah (vv. 32–33). The most important descendants of Abraham were, of course, those who formed the line of promise through Isaac.
The list of Hagar’s descendants here is taken from Gen 25:13–16a, although as is usual with the Chronicler some details are omitted, for example, “the descendants of Dedan” (Gen 25:3b).


ABRAHAM’S DESCENDANTS THROUGH KETURAH (1:32–33)

1:32–33 Keturah was Abraham’s concubine, a term used loosely for “wife” (Gen 25:1). The sons of “Keturah” (meaning “frankincense”) are appropriately named. They came from an area to the east and southeast of Israel that produced frankincense. They are here recognized as kindred to Israel but less closely connected than the Ishmaelites. Only the descendants of Jokshan (v. 32) and Midian (v. 33) are listed, those of Dedan being ignored (cf. Gen 25:3–4). The descendants of Dedan were South Arabians. Perhaps the Chronicler thought they were only peripheral to his main theme.


ABRAHAM’S DESCENDANTS THROUGH SARAH (1:34–37)

The genealogical list picks up from v. 28b.
1:34 From Sarah came Isaac, whose sons were Esau and Israel (Jacob). The shortest description of Abraham comes in v. 34, “Abraham was the father of Isaac.”
1:35–37 Esau’s descendants are listed first. Some of these touch the story of Israel elsewhere in Genesis in a peripheral way. The Chronicler used the name “Israel” twelve times and “Jacob” only occasionally (1 Chr 16:13, 17). The name “Israel” represented the whole nation to which he referred many times as “all Israel.” The list of Esau’s family comes from Gen 36:4–5, 10–14 and is taken up first, the less significant before the more significant.




ABRAHAM’S SONS (1:28)

1:28 Verses 24–27 trace the line of Shem to Abraham, but at v. 28 the Chronicler reaches the point he was aiming for with the person of Abraham. In a mere twenty-seven verses he is poised to take up the story of Abraham’s family, having traced the development of the human race from Adam to Noah to Abraham.


ABRAHAM’S DESCENDANTS THROUGH ISHMAEL (1:29–31)

1:29–31 After introducing Abraham’s two sons, Isaac and Ishmael, the Chronicler deals first with what to him were the secondary lines of descent from Abraham, namely, the descendants through Hagar (vv. 29–31) and through Keturah (vv. 32–33). The most important descendants of Abraham were, of course, those who formed the line of promise through Isaac.
The list of Hagar’s descendants here is taken from Gen 25:13–16a, although as is usual with the Chronicler some details are omitted, for example, “the descendants of Dedan” (Gen 25:3b).


ABRAHAM’S DESCENDANTS THROUGH KETURAH (1:32–33)

1:32–33 Keturah was Abraham’s concubine, a term used loosely for “wife” (Gen 25:1). The sons of “Keturah” (meaning “frankincense”) are appropriately named. They came from an area to the east and southeast of Israel that produced frankincense. They are here recognized as kindred to Israel but less closely connected than the Ishmaelites. Only the descendants of Jokshan (v. 32) and Midian (v. 33) are listed, those of Dedan being ignored (cf. Gen 25:3–4). The descendants of Dedan were South Arabians. Perhaps the Chronicler thought they were only peripheral to his main theme.


ABRAHAM’S DESCENDANTS THROUGH SARAH (1:34–37)

The genealogical list picks up from v. 28b.
1:34 From Sarah came Isaac, whose sons were Esau and Israel (Jacob). The shortest description of Abraham comes in v. 34, “Abraham was the father of Isaac.”
1:35–37 Esau’s descendants are listed first. Some of these touch the story of Israel elsewhere in Genesis in a peripheral way. The Chronicler used the name “Israel” twelve times and “Jacob” only occasionally (1 Chr 16:13, 17). The name “Israel” represented the whole nation to which he referred many times as “all Israel.” The list of Esau’s family comes from Gen 36:4–5, 10–14 and is taken up first, the less significant before the more significant.
1:36 In Gen 36:11–12 Timna is presented slightly differently as Eliphaz’s “concubine” (cf. the NIV text note).


(6) The Edomites: The Line of Esau and Seir (1:38–54)

38 The sons of Seir:
    Lotan, Shobal, Zibeon, Anah, Dishon, Ezer and Dishan.
    39 The sons of Lotan:
    Hori and Homam. Timna was Lotan’s sister.
    40 The sons of Shobal:
    Alvan, Manahath, Ebal, Shepho and Onam.
    The sons of Zibeon:
    Aiah and Anah.
    41 The son of Anah:
    Dishon.
    The sons of Dishon:
    Hemdan, Eshban, Ithran and Keran.
    42 The sons of Ezer:
    Bilhan, Zaavan and Akan.
    The sons of Dishan:
    Uz and Aran.

    43 These were the kings who reigned in Edom before any Israelite king reigned:
      Bela son of Beor, whose city was named Dinhabah.
    44 When Bela died, Jobab son of Zerah from Bozrah succeeded him as king.
    45 When Jobab died, Husham from the land of the Temanites succeeded him as king.
    46 When Husham died, Hadad son of Bedad, who defeated Midian in the country of Moab, succeeded him as king. His city was named Avith.
    47 When Hadad died, Samlah from Masrekah succeeded him as king.
    48 When Samlah died, Shaul from Rehoboth on the river succeeded him as king.
    49 When Shaul died, Baal-Hanan son of Acbor succeeded him as king.
    50 When Baal-Hanan died, Hadad succeeded him as king. His city was named Pau, and his wife’s name was Mehetabel daughter of Matred, the daughter of Me-Zahab. 51 Hadad also died.
    The chiefs of Edom were:
    Timna, Alvah, Jetheth, 52 Oholibamah, Elah, Pinon, 53 Kenaz, Teman, Mibzar, 54 Magdiel and Iram. These were the chiefs of Edom.


THE PEOPLE OF SEIR (1:38–42)

1:38–42 Seir is not listed as a descendant of Esau in any of the genealogies available to us. However, both Seir and Esau dwelt in Edom (cf. 2 Chr 25:11, 14). Perhaps the Chronicler’s interest here was geographical. The material in Gen 36:20–28 was omitted. He seems to have assumed his readers had a knowledge of Genesis, so he could omit much of its detail. But the passage suggests there was a broad but perhaps tenuous link between Israel and these tribal groups to the southeast.


THE EDOMITE KINGS (1:43–51a) AND CHIEFS (1:51b–54)

The list follows Gen 36:31–39 almost verbatim. It is not clear why the Chronicler should have included this list unless it was that having mentioned the people of Seir he decided to add some remarks about their neighbors, the Edomites, in order to complete his picture of these peoples to the southwest of Israel. The Edomites played a major role in the history of Israel and were closely related to them. The Chronicler did not feel he could pass them by without comment. He did, however, omit “the chiefs among Esau’s descendants” (Gen 36:15–19).
1:43 The historical note about the “kings who reigned in Edom before any Israelite king reigned” suggests a time reference to conditions that obtained in Israel in the days of the judges. Later, when David was king, Edom fell under Israel’s control (1 Chr 18:13), although later Israel lost its control.
1:44–54 The list of the kings who reigned in Edom does not suggest any kind of dynastic line. The residences of the kings were at different places. Evidently these rulers were something like the “judges” in the Bible. The establishment of a strong dynasty was a later development. The term used for “chief” (ʾallûp) is different from the word for “king” (melek).


(7) Israel’s Sons (2:1–2)

    1 These were the sons of Israel: Reuben, Simeon, Levi, Judah, Issachar,
    Zebulun, 2 Dan, Joseph, Benjamin, Naphtali, Gad and Asher.

2:1–2 The elaborate genealogical scheme of chap. 1 reaches its climax with the words, “These were the sons of Israel.” The genealogical story of Israel proper could now begin.


2. The Line of Judah (2:3–4:23)

With 2:3 the Chronicler takes up his genealogical résumé of the sons of Israel, which will occupy him until 9:1, that is, for approximately eight chapters. The material deals with the sons of Israel: Judah (2:3–4:23), Simeon (4:24–43), Reuben (5:1–10), Gad (5:11–17), the Transjordan tribes including the half-tribe of Manasseh (5:18–26), Levi (6:1–81), Issachar (7:1–5), Benjamin (7:6–12), Naphtali (7:13), Manasseh (7:14–19), Ephraim (7:20–29), Asher (7:30–40), and Benjamin (8:1–40). At 9:1 the Chronicler sums up with the words, “All Israel was listed in the genealogies recorded in the book of the kings of Israel.” Thereafter he takes up the postexilic community in chap. 9.
The questions of the Chronicler’s sources and of the order in which the tribes are presented are of some interest. As to the sources of his material, we must give high priority to Old Testament lists such as Genesis 46 and Numbers 26. Information about geographical material, pastures, intertribal skirmishes, and so forth (4:39–43; 5:9–10, 19–21; 7:21) could have been culled from a variety of sources preserved in ancient tribal traditions. Evidently the writer also had access to military census material, for he included data about army units and personnel.
A variety of explanations has been offered about the arrangement of the tribes. Did the writer follow the order of Numbers 26 or was it according to some geographical order? No solution is entirely satisfactory. The proposal of H. G. M. Williamson is helpful. He proposes that since Judah was the strongest of his brothers and a ruler came from him (5:2), he was given pride of place. Then came Simeon, who always was associated with Judah (4:24–43). At this point the Chronicler drew in the Transjordan tribes, Reuben (5:1–10), Gad (5:11–17), and half the tribe of Manasseh (5:23–26), probably to ensure that these tribes were not overlooked.
Placing Judah first among the tribes prepares the reader for the prominence of the house of David in Chronicles as the text moves quickly to the Davidic line (2:11–15). In this we see in part the messianic program of Chronicles.
Next comes the genealogy of Levi (6:1–81), the second major postexilic group to occupy the Chronicler’s attention. This genealogy occupies the central place in the scheme. The priestly tribe of Levi was of very great importance in the postexilic period because of the temple and the rituals. The placing of Levi in the central position no doubt reflects the enormous significance of this tribe both for the Chronicler himself and for the postexilic community.
The emphasis on Judah and Levi in the genealogies marks the center of the Chronicler’s hope and faith. Two things marked the true Israel: the king and the priest. These two men, or perhaps better institutions, reflected God’s choice for the leadership of the people and the establishment of the kingdom of God. Although the king had passed from the scene already in the Chronicler’s day, the author obviously wanted to hold up this as the ideal and goal. The ultimate fulfillment, in fact, would be the uniting of both king and priest in the one man, Christ Jesus.
The third major tribe was Benjamin (chap. 8), but between Levi (chap. 6) and Benjamin is material on Issachar (7:1–5), some military material on Benjamin (7:6–12; cf. chap. 8), Naphtali (7:13), Western Manasseh (7:14–19), Ephraim (7:20–29), and Asher (7:30–40). The genealogies of Zebulun and Dan are lacking, and that of Naphtali is brief (7:13). The reason for this is not clear, but perhaps the Chronicler did not include all the material he had at his disposal but made use of just enough to allow the general sweep of the tribal genealogies to cover the whole. His main purpose was achieved by giving full attention to the main postexilic tribes of Judah (2:3–4:23), Levi (6:1–81), and Benjamin (8:1–40), which covered between them the royal descent, the priestly group, and the Benjamites from which Saul, the first king of Israel, came (1 Sam 9:1). He gathered round those three tribes representative material from the other tribes so as to preserve the concept of “all Israel.” The postexilic community known to the Chronicler consisted largely of members of Judah, Levi, and Benjamin, but the whole included representatives of all the tribes. In fact, at no time did all of the people go into exile; and since there would always have been some intertribal migration, it was extremely likely that the true picture was one of an “all-Israel” distribution in postexilic times—even if the tribal picture in the central area was predominantly a Judah-Levi-Benjamin composition.
The analysis and discussion of the tribes of Israel begins at 2:3 with the tribe of Judah, to which the Chronicler devoted by far his longest coverage. It was this line that gave rise to Israel’s kings. David, a key figure for the Chronicler, came from the tribe of Judah. The emphasis on the line of David here signals the major emphasis of the Chronicler. He was looking to the Davidic monarchy as the model for the future hope of his people. In contrast, he ignored the exodus almost entirely.


(1) The Sons of Judah Up to Hezron and His Sons (2:3–9)

    3 The sons of Judah:
    Er, Onan and Shelah. These three were born to him by a Canaanite woman, the daughter of Shua. Er, Judah’s firstborn, was wicked in the Lord’s sight; so the Lord put him to death. 4 Tamar, Judah’s daughter-in-law, bore him Perez and Zerah. Judah had five sons in all.
    5 The sons of Perez:
    Hezron and Hamul.
    6 The sons of Zerah:
    Zimri, Ethan, Heman, Calcol and Darda—five in all.
    7 The son of Carmi:
    Achar, who brought trouble on Israel by violating the ban on taking devoted things.
    8 The son of Ethan:
    Azariah.
    9 The sons born to Hezron were:
    Jerahmeel, Ram and Caleb.

From a genealogical perspective, the royal clan of Judah did not show much promise. His eldest son Er died because of wickedness. As a familiarity with the account would show (Gen 38), it did not get much better since Judah’s second and third sons did not bear sons either. It was rather through the sordid incident of Judah and his daughter-in-law Tamar, disguised as a prostitute, that the promised heritage was perpetuated through their twin sons, Perez and Zerah. Ironically, the Chronicler could in one and the same breath show the consequences of sin (death of Er) and also the grace of God abounding in the midst of it as two sons were born by means of Judah’s wicked deed. Out of this union came the ancestral father of Israel’s greatest king (Ruth 4:18–22).
2:3 The Chronicler disposed of the sons of Judah in a brief space (2:3–9) before embarking on his peculiar chronological scheme at 2:9 with the sons of Hezron. The source of this information is Genesis 38, where the Canaanite mother of Er, Onan, and Shelah appears as Shua. Nothing more is said about Onan, but Er, Judah’s firstborn, is described as “wicked in the LORD’S sight; so the LORD put him to death.” Shelah is referred to in 4:21–23. Another Canaanite woman, Tamar, appears in the genealogy of David’s family, demonstrating the more generous attitude to foreigners than is shown in some postexilic writers. The Chronicler evidently had no inhibitions about this fact and displayed thereby some of the perspectives of the New Testament. That Judah had two sons by his Canaanite daughter-in-law Tamar was contrary to the law of Lev 18:15; 20:12. But divine grace can overrule such restrictions, and divine election will move forward despite human failure (cf. Matt 1:3). Evidently the Chronicler did not regard marriage to a Canaanite woman as a hindrance to the development of the Davidic line.
A contrast appears here with the slaying of Er for his wickedness in the eyes of the Lord. Perhaps Er showed a persistent attitude toward evil. God is the God of both judgment and mercy. The Chronicler may have had a deliberate theological intention in stating that Er was wicked in the Lord’s sight. Here is the first reference to the divine name “Yahweh” (“LORD”) in 1 Chronicles.
2:4 The Chronicler noted that Judah had five sons in all. All five were born in unusual circumstances, three to a foreign mother and two as a result of a sexual irregularity. Divine grace was able to deal with each case—an important emphasis. No circumstance is beyond the reach of God’s grace.
2:5 As the genealogy develops, concentration falls briefly on the fourth son, Perez, and his sons, Hezron and Hamul (cf. Gen 46:12; Num 26:21). No more is said of Hamul, and the emphasis falls on Hezron and his family because David came from this line (2:9–17; note vv. 13–15). J. G. McConville notes here the theme of the fresh start. The Chronicler “makes no attempt to disguise the fact that it [the promise to the patriarchs] had its beginning in Judah’s illicit relationship with his daughter-in-law Tamar.” Despite such an event, God begins anew, i.e., provides a fresh start, in fulfilling his promise to his people.
2:6–8 The five sons of Zerah evidently were of some importance to the Chronicler because of their connection with musical guilds. Zimri seems to link with a group of individuals with musical connections. Ethan (lit., “a native”) is listed with Heman, Calcol, and Darda, “sons of Mahol” in 4:31, the traditional “wise men” of Solomon’s court. They are associated with musical guilds, as in the headings to Pss 88 and 89. In no other biblical tradition are Ethan, Heman, Calcol, and Darda attached to Zerah of the tribe of Judah. Some writers have conjectured that this group of five (v. 6) may have been members of a guild of musicians who were “adopted” into the tribe of Judah because of their musical skills. As v. 3 shows, a Canaanite woman was the mother of three of Judah’s sons. Similarly, Rahab of Jericho was a Canaanitess, and Ruth the Moabitess became part of the family of Israel. Evidently in earlier times in Israel there was a degree of flexibility in regard to the composition of families.
The name “Carmi” is known from Josh 7:1, 18 as the father of Achan (or Achar). The Chronicler added the note “who brought trouble on Israel by violating the ban on taking devoted things.”
Azariah is not known from elsewhere, but the Chronicler may have used a version of the Hebrew text different from the MT, a feature of Chronicles (see Introduction).
2:9 The sons of Hezron were Jerahmeel, Ram, and Kelubai (Caleb). At this point in the genealogy an interesting pattern emerges. The Chronicler made use of the literary device known as chiasmus in which there is a reversal of a sequence. The genealogy of the sons of Hezron is broken up in this way as follows:

    A      Descendants of Ram (as far as David) 2:10–17;
      B      Descendants of Caleb 2:18–24;
         C      Descendants of Jerahmeel 2:25–33;
         C´      Supplementary material on Jerehmeel 2:34–41;
      B´      Supplementary material on Caleb 2:42–55;
    C´      Supplementary material on Ram (David’s descendants) chap. 3.

A comprehension of this pattern helps the reader to follow some of the complexities of these genealogies which are something of a puzzle from 2:10 to 3:24. The figure of David who lies squarely in the tribe of Judah embraces this whole genealogical arrangement in a large inclusio.


(2) The Sons of Judah from Ram, Son of Hezron, as Far as David (2:10–17)

    10 Ram was the father of Amminadab, and Amminadab the father of Nahshon, the leader of the people of Judah. 11 Nahshon was the father of Salmon, Salmon the father of Boaz, 12 Boaz the father of Obed and Obed the father of Jesse.
    13 Jesse was the father of Eliab his firstborn; the second son was Abinadab, the third Shimea, 14 the fourth Nethanel, the fifth Raddai, 15 the sixth Ozem and the seventh David. 16 Their sisters were Zeruiah and Abigail. Zeruiah’s three sons were Abishai, Joab and Asahel. 17 Abigail was the mother of Amasa, whose father was Jether the Ishmaelite.

The family of Hezron brought the Chronicler to one of his key concerns, the family of David (v. 15). Hezron’s genealogy has no parallel in Old Testament sources. Hezron, son of Perez, is mentioned in Gen 46:12 and Num 26:21, but no genealogy is developed. The name is given to a town between Kadesh Barnea and Addar (Josh 15:3) and in the composite name Kerioth-Hezron in Josh 15:25. It is also associated with Reuben in Gen 46:9 and 1 Chr 5:3. The name evidently was well known and had links with southern Canaan. But the precise genealogy in 1 Chr 2:10–17, 25–33, 42–50 is lacking elsewhere. Possibly the Chronicler composed his genealogy from independent sources such as vv. 10–17, 25–33, 42–50 in order to present his argument in a chiastic framework. Hezron’s sons were Jerahmeel, Ram, and Chelubai (Caleb; v. 9). Ram, the middle son, is taken up first (vv. 10–17). His genealogy is developed through Jesse (v. 13) and David (v. 14). The order in which these three sons are presented is Ram, Caleb, and Jerahmeel. The main line of descent is presented first, although Ram was the second son. This was in accord with the Chronicler’s literary plan. There is no reason to postulate a later literary expansion.
2:10–17 The genealogy of Ram here is to be compared with Ruth 4:19–22; Num 2:3; and 1 Sam 16:6–8, though the connection between the Chronicler and these passages is not clear. Each of these texts may go back to an original temple source.
The Samuel material refers to eight sons of Jesse (1 Sam 16:10–11; 17:12) while the Chronicler mentions only seven (v. 15). One rabbinical interpretation is that perhaps one died childless and so was not mentioned by the Chronicler. The Syriac version adds Elihu as a brother of David (1 Chr 27:18) though this may be a variant of Eliab or even an otherwise unnamed eighth son of Jesse. The presence of David in a list reaching back through Jesse to Hezron and Judah provides the vital genealogical link for the Chronicler. Zeruiah and Abigail are listed as sisters of David (v. 16; cf. 1 Sam 26:6; 2 Sam 17:25). These evidently were listed here because they occur in the story of Abigail later on.
Nahshon, son of Amminadab, is described as a “leader” (tribal prince) of Judah. He was a contemporary of Moses and Aaron (Exod 6:23; Num 2:3). These verses fill in important details of David’s life although they are far from complete. Evidently this did not matter to the Chronicler provided the general shape of the line was established.


(3) The Descendants of Caleb, Son of Hezron (2:18–24)

    18 Caleb son of Hezron had children by his wife Azubah (and by Jerioth). These were her sons: Jesher, Shobab and Ardon. 19 When Azubah died, Caleb married Ephrath, who bore him Hur. 20 Hur was the father of Uri, and Uri the father of Bezalel.
    21 Later, Hezron lay with the daughter of Makir the father of Gilead (he had married her when he was sixty years old), and she bore him Segub. 22 Segub was the father of Jair, who controlled twenty-three towns in Gilead. 23 (But Geshur and Aram captured Havvoth Jair, as well as Kenath with its surrounding settlements—sixty towns.) All these were descendants of Makir the father of Gilead.
    24 After Hezron died in Caleb Ephrathah, Abijah the wife of Hezron bore him Ashhur the father of Tekoa.

The descendants of Caleb (Chelubai), the third son of Hezron, are now listed, the most important of these being Bezalel because of his association with the tabernacle and its furnishings. The logical arrangement of vv. 18–24 is not entirely clear to us now. Probably fragments have been taken from their original and fuller context. Thus vv. 18–19 have their continuation in vv. 50b–52, and v. 20 is related to Exod 31:2 and 35:30 while v. 23b is a formula without a context.
2:18 The Caleb referred to is not the Caleb of Num 13:6, who was a contemporary of Bezalel, the great-grandson of the Caleb listed here (v. 20). Caleb the spy is mentioned in a different context (4:15). Further, some textual problems are found here. By a small emendation Jerioth is shown to be the daughter of Caleb and Azubah.
2:19–20 Caleb married Ephrath after the death of Azubah, and she bore him Hur, the grandfather of Bezalel, the builder of the tabernacle (Exod 31:1–11; 2 Chr 1:5). The Chronicler here placed side by side the genealogies of Ram and Caleb from whom came the royal line and the temple, thus stressing the close connection between these key ideas.
2:21–24 Hezron later married the daughter of Makir, a son of Manasseh (Num 32:39–41), when he was sixty years old. She bore him Segub, father of Jair, who controlled twenty-three towns in Gilead. Jair is known from Judg 10:3–4 as a Gileadite. This link between Judah and Manasseh shows how the tribes became mixed, probably quite early. There were evidently encroachments into this area from Geshur and Aram (v. 23a) long before the western expansion of Aram-Damascus. The Chronicler evidently regarded these early associations between Judah’s family and Transjordan as significant. Unfortunately we do not have enough data to analyze vv. 21–24 in detail.
A further question arises in regard to the geographical interpretation of these verses. There is information here about intertribal and interclan relationships. The genealogical form in which these verses are cast cannot always be studied properly apart from the domestic, political, and religious relationships of the area. The genealogies in Chronicles are highly complex.
What may appear to be a heavy emphasis on geographical material in vv. 21–24 could be understood as an accurate expression of the perception of the Chronicler. “The comparative data now available suggests that at many points the Bible’s genealogical views are quite similar to those of living societies where genealogies are still created, preserved, and used. A recognition of these similarities can add new dimensions to the biblical genealogies and can allow the modern reader to enter more fully into the world of the ancient Israelites.”


(4) The Sons of Jerahmeel, Firstborn Son of Hezron (2:25–33)

    25 The sons of Jerahmeel the firstborn of Hezron: Ram his firstborn, Bunah, Oren, Ozem and Ahijah. 26 Jerahmeel had another wife, whose name was Atarah; she was the mother of Onam.
    27 The sons of Ram the firstborn of Jerahmeel:
    Maaz, Jamin and Eker.
    28 The sons of Onam:
    Shammai and Jada.
    The sons of Shammai:
    Nadab and Abishur.
    29 Abishur’s wife was named Abihail, who bore him Ahban and Molid.
    30 The sons of Nadab:
    Seled and Appaim. Seled died without children.
    31 The son of Appaim:
    Ishi, who was the father of Sheshan. Sheshan was the father of Ahlai.
    32 The sons of Jada, Shammai’s brother: Jether and Jonathan. Jether died without children.
    33 The sons of Jonathan:
    Peleth and Zaza.
      These were the descendants of Jerahmeel.

The ominous repetition of “died without children” (2:30, 32) and the absence of male offspring for Sheshan (2:34) spoke volumes to readers anxious about their future. The linkage from Adam to Abraham to Jacob-Israel to David and so forth was never automatic. The harsh realities of life were that some families did not enjoy perpetuation. These startling exceptions to the rule showed how the genealogical survival of the appointed, such as the royal and high priestly houses, were a tribute to the sustaining grace of God’s hand across the ages. This was the case for the house of Jesse and his “seventh son” David (2:13) whose male offspring were also numerous (3:1–9). There must have been a growing sense of confidence in the Lord’s sovereignty as each clan and family’s names resounded in the mind of the ancient reader. No person was incidental to Israel’s life, past or present. The Church has always experienced the same triumphant note in a future for God’s people because of the testimony of the past.
2:25–33 The genealogy is presented in a straightforward manner. It evidently goes back to a well-preserved source, but it lacks Old Testament parallels. The Jerahmeelites came from an area to the south of Judah (1 Sam 27:10; 30:29), and to judge from names like Ahijah (v. 25) and Jonathan (v. 33) they shared the faith of Israel, whose God was Yahweh. They originally may have been non-Israelites who became absorbed into Judah. In any case this strong association with Judah could provide a sufficient link with Judah to enable them to claim a place in the postexilic community.
Between vv. 25–33 and vv. 42–50a is a parallel in literary expression. The opening and closing formulae are similar, but the arrangement of the names differs. In vv. 25–33 the descendants of Jerahmeel by his two wives are presented in segments arranged in horizontal form, while in vv. 34–41 the arrangement is vertical and linear in form, without opening and closing formulae. Little is known about the clan of Jerahmeel, but there is no reason to doubt the general reliability of this record.


(5) Supplementary Material on Jerahmeel (2:34–41)

    34 Sheshan had no sons—only daughters.
    He had an Egyptian servant named Jarha. 35 Sheshan gave his daughter in marriage to his servant Jarha, and she bore him Attai.
    36 Attai was the father of Nathan,
    Nathan the father of Zabad,
    37 Zabad the father of Ephlal,
      Ephlal the father of Obed,
    38 Obed the father of Jehu,
      Jehu the father of Azariah,
    39 Azariah the father of Helez,
      Helez the father of Eleasah,
    40 Eleasah the father of Sismai,
      Sismai the father of Shallum,
    41 Shallum the father of Jekamiah,
      and Jekamiah the father of Elishama.

2:34–41 These verses consist of a vertically arranged genealogy. It leads from Sheshan (v. 34) to Elishama (v. 41), giving the pedigree of Elishama, who had no sons but only daughters (v. 34). One of the daughters was given in marriage to an Egyptian slave, Jarha. From this union one branch of the family led to Elishama (v. 41), fourteen generations later, perhaps about the time of David although there is no certainty about this.


(6) Supplementary Material on Caleb, Brother of Jerahmeel (2:42–55)

    42 The sons of Caleb the brother of Jerahmeel:
    Mesha his firstborn, who was the father of Ziph, and his son Mareshah, who was the father of Hebron.
    43 The sons of Hebron:
    Korah, Tappuah, Rekem and Shema. 44 Shema was the father of Raham, and Raham the father of Jorkeam. Rekem was the father of Shammai. 45 The son of Shammai was Maon, and Maon was the father of Beth Zur.
      46 Caleb’s concubine Ephah was the mother of Haran, Moza and Gazez. Haran was the father of Gazez.
    47 The sons of Jahdai:
    Regem, Jotham, Geshan, Pelet, Ephah and Shaaph.
    48 Caleb’s concubine Maacah was the mother of Sheber and Tirhanah. 49 She also gave birth to Shaaph the father of Madmannah and to Sheva the father of Macbenah and Gibea. Caleb’s daughter was Acsah. 50 These were the descendants of Caleb.

    The sons of Hur the firstborn of Ephrathah:
    Shobal the father of Kiriath Jearim, 51 Salma the father of Bethlehem, and Hareph the father of Beth Gader.
    52 The descendants of Shobal the father of Kiriath Jearim were:
    Haroeh, half the Manahathites, 53 and the clans of Kiriath Jearim: the Ithrites, Puthites, Shumathites and Mishraites. From these descended the Zorathites and Eshtaolites.
    54 The descendants of Salma:
    Bethlehem, the Netophathites, Atroth Beth Joab, half the Manahathites, the Zorites, 55 and the clans of scribes who lived at Jabez: the Tirathites, Shimeathites and Sucathites. These are the Kenites who came from Hammath, the father of the house of Recab.

Verses 42–50a begin with an introduction, “The sons of Caleb,” and conclude with “these were the descendants of Caleb” (v. 50). Verses 50b–55 begin with “the sons of Hur” (cf. 1 Sam 30:14, 29). A particular formula is used in these verses, namely, “X the father of Y,” where Y represents a place name, for example, “Mareshah, who was the father of Hebron” (v. 42). This is a different way of expressing a genealogy in which a person is considered “the father” of a city rather than of an individual. Several of these cities are known in lists of cities allotted to Judah (Josh 15). Thus Ziph (Josh 15:55) has sometimes been identified with Tell Ziph about five miles southeast of Hebron (or Khirbet-ez-Zaifeh, southwest of Kurnub).
2:42–49 The name “Hebron” is important here. His relationship to Caleb is known elsewhere in the Old Testament (Josh 14:13; 15:13; Judg 1:20). The area of Calebite settlement lay near Hebron with several of the settlements lying beyond the postexilic province of Judah in the days of the Chronicler. The material in these verses may reflect an earlier situation. There are further references in these verses to concubines being the mothers of some of the individuals listed (vv. 46, 48). Such a state of affairs did not destroy the validity of descent.
2:50–51 Verses 50b–55 should be linked with 2:18–19, 24 and 4:4b. Hur was the firstborn of Ephrathah, the second wife of Caleb (2:19). Each of the three sons of Hur (vv. 50–51) is called “the father of” a well-known city, namely, Kiriath Jearim, Bethlehem, and Beth Gader.
2:52–54 “Shobal” is an Edomite name (cf. Gen 36:20, 23, 29; 1 Chr 1:38, 40). His descendants were Haroeh (the seer or perhaps Reaiah; cf. 4:2), half the Manahathites, and the clans of Kiriath Jearim. These names suggest associations between Judah and its neighbors to the south. The genealogy in vv. 50b–55 may well reflect the ongoing amalgamation of previously unrelated tribal elements into the mainstream of Judah.
The genealogies up to this point in chap. 2 have brought together under Hezron’s sons Jerahmeel and Caleb (vv. 5, 18) a wide variety of genealogical, geographical, and general cultural information, some of which is derived from the biblical sources and some from other sources.
The line of David was derived from Ram, the son of Hezron (vv. 10–17). Other details about this tribe are gathered under the other two sons of Hezron, Caleb (vv. 18–24) and Jerahmeel (vv. 25–41). The aim of the Chronicler was to attach all of these diverse elements to the tribe of Judah through Hezron and his descendants. There evidently was some prestige as well as political, economic, and social advantage belonging to the only tribe restored to its own territory by official decree. Many of those who had become attached to the tribe of Judah shared in the status by adoption, and the present genealogy served to recognize that adoption.
2:55 The reference to the clans of scribes (v. 55) is puzzling. Some commentators understand them to be the residents of a town like Kiriath-sefer (book city). The associated names are not known otherwise. They are called “the Kenites,” who came from Hammath. Perhaps they were connected by marriage with the ancestors of “the house of Rechab,” the Rechabites, people who espoused a nonsedentary life (Jer 25); but certainty is not possible. In fact, there may be no connection between the Kenites and the Rechabites.


(7) Supplementary Material on Ram, David’s Descendants (3:1–24)

    1 These were the sons of David born to him in Hebron:
      The firstborn was Amnon the son of Ahinoam of Jezreel;
    the second, Daniel the son of Abigail of Carmel;
      2 the third, Absalom the son of Maacah daughter of Talmai king of Geshur; the fourth, Adonijah the son of Haggith;
      3 the fifth, Shephatiah the son of Abital;
    and the sixth, Ithream, by his wife Eglah.
      4 These six were born to David in Hebron, where he reigned seven years and six months.
David reigned in Jerusalem thirty-three years, 5 and these were the children born to him there:

    Shammua, Shobab, Nathan and Solomon. These four were by Bathsheba daughter of Ammiel. 6 There were also Ibhar, Elishua, Eliphelet, 7 Nogah, Nepheg, Japhia, 8 Elishama, Eliada and Eliphelet—nine in all. 9 All these were the sons of David, besides his sons by his concubines. And Tamar was their sister.
    10 Solomon’s son was Rehoboam,
    Abijah his son,
    Asa his son,
    Jehoshaphat his son,
      11 Jehoram his son,
    Ahaziah his son,
    Joash his son,
      12 Amaziah his son,
    Azariah his son,
    Jotham his son,
      13 Ahaz his son,
    Hezekiah his son,
    Manasseh his son,
      14 Amon his son,
    Josiah his son.
    15 The sons of Josiah:
    Johanan the firstborn,
    Jehoiakim the second son,
    Zedekiah the third,
    Shallum the fourth.
    16 The successors of Jehoiakim:
    Jehoiachin his son,
    and Zedekiah.

    17 The descendants of Jehoiachin the captive:
    Shealtiel his son, 18 Malkiram, Pedaiah, Shenazzar, Jekamiah, Hoshama and Nedabiah.
    19 The sons of Pedaiah:
    Zerubbabel and Shimei.
    The sons of Zerubbabel:
    Meshullam and Hananiah. Shelomith was their sister.
      20 There were also five others:
      Hashubah, Ohel, Berekiah, Hasadiah and Jushab-Hesed.
    21 The descendants of Hananiah:
    Pelatiah and Jeshaiah, and the sons of Rephaiah, of Arnan, of Obadiah and of Shecaniah.
    22 The descendants of Shecaniah:
    Shemaiah and his sons:
    Hattush, Igal, Bariah, Neariah and Shaphat—six in all.
    23 The sons of Neariah:
    Elioenai, Hizkiah and Azrikam—three in all.
    24 The sons of Elioenai:
    Hodaviah, Eliashib, Pelaiah, Akkub, Johanan, Delaiah and Anani—seven in all.

This chapter deals with the descendants of David. Following the literary device of chiasmus, the last element in the pattern outlined above (see at 2:9) is supplementary material on Ram (cf. 2:10–17, where the descendants of Ram as far as David are given), sons born to David in Hebron (3:1–4a), and those born in Jerusalem (3:4b–8). The effect of beginning and ending the chiasmus with Ram is to draw attention to this line, which was David’s. The sources for this material were 2 Sam 3:2–5 and 5:14–16. David reigned in Hebron seven years and six months, and he reigned thirty-three years “over all Israel and Judah” (2 Sam 5:5). This listing of the two groups of David’s sons does not occur elsewhere in Chronicles. The Chronicler does not seem to have been anxious to refer to David’s rule over only part of the land. His perspective is from the viewpoint of “all Israel.”
This account contains a number of textual variants and some simplifying of details about David’s wives in comparison with the Samuel account, but the two lists are essentially the same.
3:1–9 The list of David’s sons born in Jerusalem also differs from 2 Sam 5:14–16 and 1 Chr 14:3–7. The verses in 1 Chronicles 3 refer to Shammua, Shobab, Nathan, and Solomon born to Bethshua (Bathsheba).
Among the variations, this list also refers to nine sons (v. 8) born in Jerusalem. A daughter Tamar is also mentioned (v. 9). The name “Daniel” (3:1), David’s second son, here is unusual. In 2 Sam 3:3 it is Chileab. Various Greek texts offer other renderings.
Eliphelet and Nogah do not appear in 2 Samuel. Eliphelet appears also in v. 8. Both names appear in 1 Chronicles 14. The name Eliada (v. 8) appears in 1 Chr 14:7 as Beeliada. The change from the element Beel-(Baal) to El reflects a tendency known elsewhere in the Old Testament to avoid the offensive name of Baal, a tendency with which the Chronicler would agree.
3:10–16 The Davidic dynastic line up to the exile is well known from the books of Kings. The name of Athaliah is omitted (cf. 2 Kgs 11:1–16) because she was a usurper and a Canaanite princess. The true Davidic succession was through Joash, who was kept in hiding during Athaliah’s interregnum. The normal opening and closing notes for a ruler are omitted for Athaliah in Kings as though to emphasize her illegality.
Some other features of this list are worthy of mention. Uzziah’s throne name, Azariah, is used in v. 12 (cf. 2 Chr 26). Similarly Shallum (v. 15) is given his throne name, Jehoahaz (cf. Jer 22:11). Josiah’s firstborn Johanan is not known elsewhere. He may have died young and is not listed because he was never in contention for the throne. The other three sons of Josiah, Jehoiakim, Zedekiah (whose name originally was Mattaniah; cf. 2 Kgs 24:17), and Shallum are listed here in the order of their age and not in the order of their accession to the throne, which was Jehoahaz (2 Kgs 23:30), Jehoiakim (Eliakim, 2 Kgs 23:34), and Zedekiah. Jehoiachin (whose name in the Heb. text here is Jeconiah; cf. Esth 2:9; Jer 24:1; 27:20; 28:4; 29:2), the son of Jehoiakim, however, was king for a brief period (2 Kgs 24:17) but was succeeded by his uncle Zedekiah. Jehoiakim was friendly with Egypt and would have been the successor to Josiah had not “the people of the land” chosen Shallum (Jehoahaz).
There are some difficulties in this section about ages, the solution to which is not now clear. Jehoiakim reigned until the attack of Nebuchadnezzar on Jerusalem. About that time Jehoiakim met his death (2 Kgs 24:1–6), and Jehoiachin became king (2 Kgs 24:8–10). It is difficult to interpret the texts at this point. Both 2 Kgs 24:17 and the LXX of 2 Chr 36:10 regard Zedekiah as the son of Josiah and therefore Jehoiachin’s uncle (Jer 37:1). However, whereas 2 Chr 36:10 appears to regard Zedekiah as Jehoiachin’s brother, 1 Chr 3:16 is ambiguous. The most likely solution is that Zedekiah was Josiah’s son and the uncle of Jehoiachin, but that perhaps Jehoiakim had a son Zedekiah, which led to confusion.
Good external documentation exists for Jehoiachin’s exile and imprisonment. The Babylonian Chronicle refers to Jehoiachin, king of Judah, and his five sons (seven sons in 1 Chr 3:17–18) to whom rations were allotted by the authorities in Babylon.
3:17 These verses trace the line of Davidic descent from the exile in the days of Jehoiachin into postexilic times down to the time of the Chronicler. This period was of great importance to postexilic Israel. Parts of this list are not found elsewhere, and most of the names are unknown to us so that detailed analysis is not possible.
3:18 Some commentators have linked the name Sheshbazzar in Ezra 1:8, 11; 5:14, 16 with Shenazzar, but there probably is no connection.
3:19 Zerubbabel is named in Ezra-Nehemiah (Ezra 3:2, 8; 5:2; Neh 12:1), Haggai (1:1, 12, 14; 2:2), and the New Testament (Matt 1:12; Luke 3:27) as the son of Shealtiel, Jehoiachin’s oldest son (1 Chr 3:17). Here he is called the son of the younger Pedaiah, one apparently less significant in status. The explanation may be that Shealtiel died childless and Zerubbabel was born to Pedaiah by a levirate marriage with Shealtiel’s widow.
3:20 The children of Zerubbabel are divided into two groups, three in v. 19 and five in v. 20. The names of Zerubbabel’s children may have been symbolic, giving expression to the hopes of Israel in postexilic times. Hasadiah (v. 20) means “the Lord is kind,” Jushab-Hesed, “may kindness be returned.” The name “Shelomith” occurs on a postexilic seal found near Jerusalem, “Shelomith, maidservant/wife of Elnathan the governor.” The occurrence of such a seal may indicate she was a woman of special status, perhaps as daughter of Zerubbabel. Additional evidence for the connection comes from her mention in this predominantly male genealogy, perhaps because she married the governor.
3:21 This verse contains textual difficulties. We follow the MT. In the second half of the verse “the sons of Rephaiah” begins a list of contemporaries who were not connected to the line of Zerubbabel and his grandsons in 3:21a. The important point is that we do not have a list here of four or six generations but only two and that this verse cannot be used to date the book of Chronicles.
3:22–24 Other textual questions arise and uncertainty exists about the identity of the persons, although some names are known in extrabiblical sources of the same period. Dating is difficult although J. M. Myers attempts to provide approximate dates for the people listed in vv. 17–24. It would seem that Anami, the last name in the list, may provide a clue to the date of the Chronicler since names like these were common in the sixth and fifth centuries B.C. A date at the end of the fifth century may be proposed with some confidence.
With v. 24 the list of David’s descendants comes to an end. It stretches for eight generations beyond the exile. The Davidic line played an important role in the early days of the restoration from the exile. Haggai 2 indicates the importance of this emphasis on David: his was the line of the Messiah. Although the present text has no explicit messianic intent, the emphasis on David is significant. The Chronicler has traced David’s line from its roots down to the descendants of the royal line who lived after the exile. The kingdom may have been gone, but David’s line was still the royal line. The hope of Israel still lived. As Wilcock has remarked, the kingdom still existed in mystery form.


(8) Other Clans of Judah (4:1–23)

    1 The descendants of Judah: Perez, Hezron, Carmi, Hur and Shobal.
    2 Reaiah son of Shobal was the father of Jahath, and Jahath the father of Ahumai and Lahad. These were the clans of the Zorathites.
    3 These were the sons of Etam:
    Jezreel, Ishma and Idbash. Their sister was named Hazzelelponi.
    4 Penuel was the father of Gedor, and Ezer the father of Hushah.
      These were the descendants of Hur, the firstborn of Ephrathah and father of Bethlehem.
    5 Ashhur the father of Tekoa had two wives, Helah and Naarah.
    6 Naarah bore him Ahuzzam, Hepher, Temeni and Haahashtari. These were the descendants of Naarah.
    7 The sons of Helah:
    Zereth, Zohar, Ethnan, 8 and Koz, who was the father of Anub and Hazzobebah and of the clans of Aharhel son of Harum.

9 Jabez was more honorable than his brothers. His mother had named him Jabez, saying, “I gave birth to him in pain.” 10 Jabez cried out to the God of Israel, “Oh, that you would bless me and enlarge my territory! Let your hand be with me, and keep me from harm so that I will be free from pain.” And God granted his request.

    11 Kelub, Shuhah’s brother, was the father of Mehir, who was the father of Eshton. 12 Eshton was the father of Beth Rapha, Paseah and Tehinnah the father of Ir Nahash. These were the men of Recah.

    13 The sons of Kenaz:
    Othniel and Seraiah.
      The sons of Othniel:
    Hathath and Meonothai. 14 Meonothai was the father of Ophrah.
      Seraiah was the father of Joab,
    the father of Ge Harashim. It was called this because its people were craftsmen.
    15 The sons of Caleb son of Jephunneh:
      Iru, Elah and Naam.
      The son of Elah:
    Kenaz.
    16 The sons of Jehallelel:
    Ziph, Ziphah, Tiria and Asarel.
    17 The sons of Ezrah:
    Jether, Mered, Epher and Jalon. One of Mered’s wives gave birth to Miriam, Shammai and Ishbah the father of Eshtemoa. 18 (His Judean wife gave birth to Jered the father of Gedor, Heber the father of Soco, and Jekuthiel the father of Zanoah.) These were the children of Pharaoh’s daughter Bithiah, whom Mered had married.
    19 The sons of Hodiah’s wife, the sister of Naham:
    the father of Keilah the Garmite, and Eshtemoa the Maacathite.
    20 The sons of Shimon:
    Amnon, Rinnah, Ben-Hanan and Tilon.
      The descendants of Ishi:
    Zoheth and Ben-Zoheth.
    21 The sons of Shelah son of Judah:
    Er the father of Lecah, Laadah the father of Mareshah and the clans of the linen workers at Beth Ashbea, 22 Jokim, the men of Cozeba, and Joash and Saraph, who ruled in Moab and Jashubi Lehem. (These records are from ancient times.) 23 They were the potters who lived at Netaim and Gederah; they stayed there and worked for the king.

Chapter 4 consists of a number of apparently unrelated fragments, but evidently it was felt necessary to mention the particular people and places in the interests of giving a complete picture.
4:1 The chapter begins with additional material on Judah from preexilic times in which both Hur and Shobal are traced to Judah. Shobal was the son of Hur by Ephrathah (2:5). This list of Judah’s descendants through Hur is mentioned in 2:50, 52 but is here expanded somewhat, no doubt to explain the background to the Zorathites (2:53). Demonstrating the origins of the Zorathites seems to have been important to the writer or to his source. Zorah is known as one of the cities built by Rehoboam (2 Chr 11:10) and as a village inhabited by postexilic Judeans (Neh 11:29).
4:2 Among Reaiah’s descendants, Jahath was a common Levitical name in Chronicles (6:20, 43; 23:10–11; 24:22; 2 Chr 34:12), but Ahumai and Lahad are unique. They were Zorathites.
4:3–4 These verses present another list of the sons of Hur, but there are some textual questions. The MT reads, “These were the father of Etam.” The LXX and Vulgate are probably correct to read, “These were the sons of Etam.” Some commentators propose that we have here a listing of the family of Hur’s third son Hareph (cf. 2:51). The Etam mentioned here is the son of Hareph, who is listed with Tekoa (cf. 2:24; 4:5) and Zorah (cf. 2:54; 4:2) in cities fortified by Rehoboam (2 Chr 11:5–10). The Greek text of Josh 15:59a gives Etam as one of eleven cities in the district around Bethlehem.
4:5–8 Ashhur had two wives, Helah and Naarah, and was the younger brother of Hur.
4:6 The name “Haahashtari” carries an article, suggesting a clan, “the Ahashtarites.” It seems to be a foreign word, perhaps Persian.
4:7 Possibly the words “and Koz” have fallen out at the end of v. 7 by haplography. Some Targum texts retain it because it supplies a link with what follows in v. 8, where the phrase “and Koz” is repeated.
4:9–10 The name Jabez recurs as a place name in 2:55, but it is not unusual in the Chronicler and elsewhere in the Old Testament for a name to represent both a person and a place. In the present context vv. 9–10 are not connected with preceding verses nor with vv. 11–12. It seems to be an independent pericope that is theological in character. The name “Jabez” (Heb. yaʿbēṣ) was given to the child because his mother bore him “in pain” (Heb. bĕʿōṣeb). Jabez is described as “more honorable than his brothers.” But following an ancient belief that the name represents the character, there was a fear that evil consequences might follow for the boy (cf. Gen 35:18). Jabez called on the God of Israel to turn any possible disaster into blessing. God granted his request and responded to an earnest prayer. The power of God can overcome the liabilities of the past and the present. The Chronicler believed in the efficacy of prayer and spoke of this often in later chapters.
4:11–12 These verses often have been taken to refer to the Calebites under the formulae “X the father of Y,” but without success. The identity of Kelub is not known. The Greek text reads “Caleb,” but none of the information listed here would support an identification with Caleb the companion of Joshua. The name “Ir Nahash” means “city of Nahash” or “city of the craftsman.”
4:13–15 These were the Kenizzites, evidently another southern tribe that became attached to Judah. Othniel and Caleb “son of Jephunneh” are named as brothers (perhaps half-brothers or simply relatives) in Josh 15:17 and Judg 1:13. Caleb is referred to in Num 32:12 and Josh 14:6, 14 as a Kenizzite.
4:13 The name “Menothai” occurs in the LXX and the Vulgate but was lost in the MT by haplography.
4:14 Seraiah, son of Kenaz, was the grandfather of Ge Harashim (lit., “valley of craftsmen”). Perhaps Ge Harashim represents a place or region “because its people were craftsmen” (cf. Neh 11:35). Evidently a guild of craftsmen lived in the area. The place is associated with Lod, Ono, and other Benjamite cities after the return from exile. These places lay some thirty miles northwest of Jerusalem. This reference to craftsmen in v. 14 may point to a link with the Kenites, who had moved north.
4:15 Caleb is here identified with the son of Jephunneh. The word “Elah” could be translated as “these,” thus a transposition of the three words at the end of this verse to read “these are the sons of Kenaz” provides a better translation.
4:17–18 The whole passage in vv. 16–20 seems to have suffered somewhat in transmission, and various devices have been proposed to meet the difficulties. But any suggestion is at best tentative. A further example of descendants from a non-Israelite mother, Pharaoh’s daughter, comes in v. 18.
4:21–23 The sons of Shelah conclude the genealogy of Judah. Shelah was the oldest surviving son of Judah (cf. 2:3). The reference to “clans of linen workers” seems to throw light on early guilds of craftsmen. The claim that records were preserved from ancient times points to preexilic records.
4:22 The meaning of the text may be that the linen workers married Moabites (cf. Ruth 1). There is some possibility that the men who were in Moab returned to Bethlehem.
4:23 Another guild is that of the “potters,” who lived at Netaim and Gederah and worked for the king. They were royal potters.


3. The Tribe of Simeon (4:24–43)

    24 The descendants of Simeon:
    Nemuel, Jamin, Jarib, Zerah and Shaul;
    25 Shallum was Shaul’s son, Mibsam his son and Mishma his son.
    26 The descendants of Mishma:
    Hammuel his son, Zaccur his son and Shimei his son.
27 Shimei had sixteen sons and six daughters, but his brothers did not have many children; so their entire clan did not become as numerous as the people of Judah. 28 They lived in Beersheba, Moladah, Hazar Shual, 29 Bilhah, Ezem, Tolad, 30 Bethuel, Hormah, Ziklag, 31 Beth Marcaboth, Hazar Susim, Beth Biri and Shaaraim. These were their towns until the reign of David. 32 Their surrounding villages were Etam, Ain, Rimmon, Token and Ashan—five towns—33 and all the villages around these towns as far as Baalath. These were their settlements. And they kept a genealogical record.

  34 Meshobab, Jamlech, Joshah son of Amaziah, 35 Joel, Jehu son of Joshibiah, the son of Seraiah, the son of Asiel, 36 also Elioenai, Jaakobah, Jeshohaiah, Asaiah, Adiel, Jesimiel, Benaiah, 37 and Ziza son of Shiphi, the son of Allon, the son of Jedaiah, the son of Shimri, the son of Shemaiah.

38 The men listed above by name were leaders of their clans. Their families increased greatly, 39 and they went to the outskirts of Gedor to the east of the valley in search of pasture for their flocks. 40 They found rich, good pasture, and the land was spacious, peaceful and quiet. Some Hamites had lived there formerly.
41 The men whose names were listed came in the days of Hezekiah king of Judah. They attacked the Hamites in their dwellings and also the Meunites who were there and completely destroyed them, as is evident to this day. Then they settled in their place, because there was pasture for their flocks. 42 And five hundred of these Simeonites, led by Pelatiah, Neariah, Rephaiah and Uzziel, the sons of Ishi, invaded the hill country of Seir. 43 They killed the remaining Amalekites who had escaped, and they have lived there to this day.

The second major tribal grouping was that of Levi (6:1–80). But according to the Chronicler’s plan, he gathered up between Judah and Levi some details about Simeon, Reuben, Gad, and the half-tribe of Manasseh. In a sense the material in chap. 5 comprises the Transjordan tribes.
4:24–33 The sons of Simeon appear in other Old Testament lists, in Gen 46:10; Exod 6:15; and Num 26:12–14. The unit in 1 Chr 4:24–43 is presented in three segments: (1) the genealogy proper (4:24–27), (2) geographical material combining towns and cities (4:28–33), and (3) a fragment of tribal history (4:34–43) that includes a list of “princes” (Heb. nāśʾî). The names in these lists contain few variants. The reference in v. 27 to the fact that some of Simeon’s descendants did not have large families may point to the fact that Simeon lost its identity early as it became absorbed into Judah (Josh 19:1, 9). The name “Simeon” is absent from the blessing of Moses in Deuteronomy 33 and from the list of places to which David sent booty in 1 Sam 30:27–31. But even so, Simeon was a son of Israel and was correctly represented in the genealogy of Israel.
The list of Simeonite settlements (vv. 28–33) is dependent largely on Josh 19:2–8. Another list in Josh 15:26–32 forms part of a description of Judah’s southern territory. These places lay in the general area of Beersheba, with Ain-Rimmon, Moladah, Ashan, and Hormah not far distant. Ziklag is to be identified with Tel esh-Shariah, twelve miles northwest of Beersheba. It was given to David by King Achish of Gath (1 Sam 27:6). Shaaraim may represent Shariah, known in Egyptian records from the time of the Hyksos rulers, which was twenty miles west of Beersheba. Not all of these towns are identifiable today, although tentative identification is suggested for several of them.
The historical note that “these were their towns until the reign of David” (v. 31) points back to a period earlier than David. In fact Josh 19:2–7 refers to a time when Simeon was independent of Judah. The Chronicler evidently wished to stress that Simeon once had a tribal identity before it was absorbed into Judah. The RSV expression “they kept a genealogical record” (lit., “and their genealogical registration was theirs”) grammatically includes the pronoun of ownership twice as though the writer wanted to stress that Simeon once had its own official registration and was part of the total Israel.
We may ask in passing whether or not David, in the days when he was an outlaw, exercised authority over a considerable area of the Negeb. Certainly some of these areas were included among cities occupied by the returning exiles in Neh 11:26–29.
4:34–43 The last part of the Simeon list deals with the problem that beset Simeon in the matter of overpopulation and the need for pasture for the flocks. Under pressure of increasing population the people of Simeon expanded to the east to seek pasture and space “to the outskirts of Gedor.” The place appears as Gerar in the LXX, which seems likely (the r and d are similar in Hebrew). Gerar lay near Gaza and was more appropriately situated with regard to Ham, which could represent Egyptians, Ethiopians, or even Canaanites (Gen 10:6; 1 Chr 1:8). In that case the Simeonites expanded into Philistine areas. Both Philistines and Canaanites would have inhabited these areas, and both were regarded as descendants of Ham (Gen 10:6, 14).
There was also expansion to the southeast in the direction of Edom (Mount Seir), where they encountered “the remaining Amalekites” (v. 43), those who survived the campaigns of Saul and David and perhaps others (1 Sam 14:48; 15:3; 2 Sam 8:12).
The Chronicler, wishing to give the complete picture, noted that in Hezekiah’s day there was a campaign into Philistine territory (2 Kgs 18:8) further to the west of Gerar. It was into this area that Simeon expanded.
There is one particular textual problem in v. 41. The LXX, like the NIV, understands the proper name “Meunites.” The Vulgate and Targum translate “dwellings.”
The section on Simeon serves to underline several features of the Chronicler’s thinking. In the beginning of his discussion about the sons of Israel (2:1–2) he refers to the twelve tribes. The concept of twelve tribes was an ideal. Simeon, in fact, disappeared as a geographical and political entity long before the Chronicler wrote. Simeon’s earlier history is also obscure, but its association with southern Judah was remembered. He is given a place among the lots set out in Josh 19:1–9, where the point is made that “Judah’s portion was more than they needed. So the Simeonites received their inheritance within the territory of Judah.”
It seems odd to us that the Chronicler should detail the genealogical history of a tribe that, by his day, had all but vanished. But he is presenting the ideal of Simeon as one of the tribes of Israel in tension with the historical reality of Simeon as a nonentity. He selectively portrays the vitality of Simeon in order to show that historical circumstances have not brought an end to the ideal plan of God. By extension, the whole nation of Israel was a mere shadow of its Davidic glory by the time the Chronicler wrote, and yet he is asserting that ideal of Israel has not perished in God’s eyes.
Beersheba was a focal point for Simeon, though his area was absorbed into Judah in David’s time. Expansion of Simeon into Philistine areas (vv. 39–41) and into Edomite areas (vv. 42–43) brought them once again into regions occupied by Judah. It was evidently well known that Simeon was incorporated into Judah. Whether Simeon continued to maintain its tribal identity is impossible to say. Some of the towns referred to in 1 Chr 4:24 are mentioned in Nehemiah 11 as being resettled by the returning exiles in areas to the south of Judah. They may have found people in these areas whom they recognized as their kinsmen. But enough has been recorded to secure the place of Simeon within the family of Israel and to stress the significance of the idea of “all Israel.”


4. The Transjordan Tribes (5:1–26)

(1) The Tribe of Reuben (5:1–10)

1 The sons of Reuben the firstborn of Israel (he was the firstborn, but when he defiled his father’s marriage bed, his rights as firstborn were given to the sons of Joseph son of Israel; so he could not be listed in the genealogical record in accordance with his birthright, 2 and though Judah was the strongest of his brothers and a ruler came from him, the rights of the firstborn belonged to Joseph)—3 the sons of Reuben the firstborn of Israel:
    Hanoch, Pallu, Hezron and Carmi.
    4 The descendants of Joel:
    Shemaiah his son, Gog his son, Shimei his son, 5 Micah his son, Reaiah his son, Baal his son, 6 and Beerah his son, whom Tiglath-Pileser king of Assyria took into exile. Beerah was a leader of the Reubenites.
    7 Their relatives by clans, listed according to their genealogical records:
    Jeiel the chief, Zechariah, 8 and Bela son of Azaz, the son of Shema, the son of Joel. They settled in the area from Aroer to Nebo and Baal Meon. 9 To the east they occupied the land up to the edge of the desert that extends to the Euphrates River, because their livestock had increased in Gilead.
    10 During Saul’s reign they waged war against the Hagrites, who were defeated at their hands; they occupied the dwellings of the Hagrites throughout the entire region east of Gilead.

By the time of the Chronicler the tribes which originally lay in Transjordan were remote from Judah and had probably lost a lot of their tribal identity. Yet descendants of the “sons of Israel” lived in Transjordan as part of “all Israel.” An interesting comment on the Moabite Stone refers to “the men of Gad.” So Mesha, King of Moab in about 830 B.C. was aware of one of the Israel tribes in Transjordan in the middle of the ninth century B.C.

Up to this point the Chronicler has dealt with Judah and Simeon. But following his scheme of giving the total tribal picture built around the three central tribes of Judah, Levi, and Benjamin who remained faithful to the Davidic kingship and the temple, he needed to give attention also to the other tribes. The first of these in his order was the tribe of Reuben (5:1–10). We may postulate that the Chronicler had a source which preserved some personal details about Reuben and his descendants and brief notes of a very localized nature concerning pastures for their flocks.
5:1–2 Normally the firstborn son would have taken precedence. But Reuben, Jacob’s eldest son, born to Leah (Gen 29:32; 35:23; 49:3; Exod 6:14; Num 1:20; 26:5) defiled his father’s bed (Gen 35:22; 49:4b) and was displaced from the first place in favor of Judah. Further, Reuben was associated with Gad and the half-tribe of Manasseh. As a result, Reuben was not listed in the genealogical record in accordance with his birthright. Perhaps another factor that influenced the Chronicler in dropping Reuben from his place in the tribal list in favor of Joseph was that Joseph was the firstborn son of Rachel, Jacob’s favorite wife. Fathers could determine who was the “eldest” son, especially when the normal heir had committed an offense.
The birthright was given to Joseph’s sons. The Northern Kingdom was thus preserved within the whole family of Israel. Yet Judah became strong among his brothers, and a ruler (nāgîd) came from him, namely David (cf. 11:2; 17:7; 2 Sam 5:2; 6:21; 7:8).
5:3 The list of the sons of Reuben follows Num 26:5–6.
5:4–5 This is a brief fragment which cannot be tied into the main genealogy of Reuben. The name Baal points to a northern link where the name Baal was well known, especially in names which had more than one element.
5:6 The list extends down to the days of the Assyrian conqueror Tiglath-Pileser III (745–727 B.C.). A number of communities in Transjordan were carried captive at the same time (2 Kgs 15:29).
5:7–8 The relatives are given in a list that refers back to Beerah. In the region of Reuben, lists were evidently preserved. The area where these settled was from Aroer, which stood perched on the edge of the Wadi Arnon (Deut 2:36), and northwards to Nebo and Baal Meon (Num 32:38; Josh 13:15–18). According to the Moabite Stone these areas fell into the hands of the Moabite ruler, Mesha.
5:9 Reuben expanded eastward up to the edge of the desert under the pressure of pastoral expansion.
5:10 It was during Saul’s reign that Reuben became involved in a war with the Hagrites (cf. vv. 19–22; Ps 83:6). This campaign is not recorded elsewhere. According to Ps 83:7 they, with Moab, Edom, the Ishmaelites, and others were enemies of Israel. Other details are not known. Verses 9–10 reflect the unsettled conditions that prevailed in these areas occupied by Reuben. Reuben was eventually absorbed by Gad.


(2) The Tribe of Gad (5:11–17)

    11 The Gadites lived next to them in Bashan, as far as Salecah:
    12 Joel was the chief, Shapham the second, then Janai and Shaphat, in Bashan.
    13 Their relatives, by families, were:
    Michael, Meshullam, Sheba, Jorai, Jacan, Zia and Eber—seven in all.
    14 These were the sons of Abihail son of Huri, the son of Jaroah, the son of Gilead, the son of Michael, the son of Jeshishai, the son of Jahdo, the son of Buz.
    15 Ahi son of Abdiel, the son of Guni, was head of their family.
    16 The Gadites lived in Gilead, in Bashan and its outlying villages, and on all the pasturelands of Sharon as far as they extended.

17 All these were entered in the genealogical records during the reigns of Jotham king of Judah and Jeroboam king of Israel.

The discussion on Gad is short, a mere seven verses. It does not contain material from the lists of Gen 46:6; Num 26:15–18 or from the list of those in David’s army in 1 Chr 12:9–13. The Chronicler must have had access to an independent source. The list contains some important geographical information and an account of the Hagrite war.
5:11 The genealogy opens with a geographical note, the only one to do so. Their area was Bashan and Gilead. They lived “over against” Reuben.
5:12 Their leaders were Joel, the chief; Shapham, the second; and Janai, who was a judge.
5:13–15 The kinsmen are listed by families, seven in all.
5:16 The Gadites lived in Gilead, a rather elastic term. A word used in several places in the Old Testament appears here to describe “outlying villages,” literally, “daughters.” The reference to Sharon must be to a place mentioned on the Moabite Stone (line 13) and not to the coastal plain.
5:17 We are informed that these names were entered into the genealogical records in the days of King Jotham (742–745 B.C.) of Judah and King Jeroboam II (786–746 B.C.) of Israel. This provides information about some of the sources of the Chronicler’s material and also about the fact that Judah and Israel preserved records, guaranteeing the historical integrity of the Chronicler’s records. Jotham, of course, ruled as co-regent after his father Uzziah contracted leprosy (2 Kgs 15:5), although Gad was part of the Northern Kingdom. How these records about Gad came to be found in records in both Judah and Israel is a matter of debate.


(3) The Transjordan Wars with Arab People (5:18–22)

18 The Reubenites, the Gadites and the half-tribe of Manasseh had 44,760 men ready for military service—able-bodied men who could handle shield and sword, who could use a bow, and who were trained for battle. 19 They waged war against the Hagrites, Jetur, Naphish and Nodab. 20 They were helped in fighting them, and God handed the Hagrites and all their allies over to them, because they cried out to him during the battle. He answered their prayers, because they trusted in him. 21 They seized the livestock of the Hagrites—fifty thousand camels, two hundred fifty thousand sheep and two thousand donkeys. They also took one hundred thousand people captive, 22 and many others fell slain, because the battle was God’s. And they occupied the land until the exile.

In v. 10 reference is made to a war waged against the Hagrites. The Chronicler gives more details in these verses and wedges these details in between his account of Gad (vv. 11–17) and his account of the half-tribe of Manasseh (vv. 23–26). This was appropriate because Reuben and Gad were associated with the people of Manasseh in this campaign.
The report of the battle follows the pattern of other battle reports (cf. 2 Chr 13:13–19; 14:9–15; 18:31; 20:1–27; 26:7; 32:7–8, 20–22). Though not all elements are present in every report, they characteristically include an ambush (the battle being before and behind Israel), the trumpets and the battle shout, the course of the battle (5:20–22), the booty and captives, and the attribution of success to God (v. 21).
5:18 The numbers 44,760 represent the combined forces of the three groups. This seems to us to be a very large force. Questions arise about the meaning of the terms “thousand” and “hundred,” which often stand for military groupings rather than for numerical values (cf. 1 Chr 12). By comparison with Numbers 1 and 26, however, the numbers here are considerably less. It would seem that the Chronicler had access to military census figures of some kind. We are given a glimpse of the composition of these military forces in three descriptions: “men who could handle shield and sword,” “who could use a bow,” and “who were trained for battle.”
5:19 For the Hagrites see v. 10. The other groups were evidently Arab tribes (Gen 25:15 lists Jetur and Naphish as sons of Ishmael).
5:20 What is transparent from this report is that the impressive military credentials of the Transjordan tribes were not the deciding factor in their victory. God’s response to their prayer prompted his intervention and their final victory (cf. 2 Chr 6:34–39). Here is another piece of evidence collected by the Chronicler to demonstrate his ardent belief that kingship was not necessary for Israel to regain its lands and restore its good fortunes. What was required was a people devoted to God. A feature of the Chronicler’s theology was that when God’s people called on God in the day of battle, he helped them and handed their foes over to them. They cried out to God, they trusted him, and he answered their prayers.
5:21 The numbers of animals captured seem to be very great. We may have here another example of the use of the terms “thousand,” “hundred,” and “fifty,” which represent groups rather than arithmetic realities.
5:22 The same applies to the figure of 100,000 captives. Many were killed also. “The battle was God’s.” The phrase implies that the armies of Israel were victorious because God’s favor was with them. When the people are in sin, God does not go out with them, and defeat follows. The tribes of Israel occupied these areas until the exile. The exile in question probably is the deportation of Transjordanian tribes in 734 B.C. (2 Kgs 15:29) in the days of Tiglath-Pileser III (745–727 B.C.). No date for this campaign can be given, and independent records are lacking. Perhaps it is a general picture of prolonged skirmishings in the region between rival settlers. Postexilic readers surely would have received here encouragement to trust God alone and to look to him for deliverance from Gentile domination. As the following verses indicate, exile resulted from failure to trust God.


(4) The Half-Tribe of Manasseh (5:23–26)

23 The people of the half-tribe of Manasseh were numerous; they settled in the land from Bashan to Baal Hermon, that is, to Senir (Mount Hermon).

24 These were the heads of their families: Epher, Ishi, Eliel, Azriel, Jeremiah, Hodaviah and Jahdiel. They were brave warriors, famous men, and heads of their families. 25 But they were unfaithful to the God of their fathers and prostituted themselves to the gods of the peoples of the land, whom God had destroyed before them. 26 So the God of Israel stirred up the spirit of Pul king of Assyria (that is, Tiglath-Pileser king of Assyria), who took the Reubenites, the Gadites and the half-tribe of Manasseh into exile. He took them to Halah, Habor, Hara and the river of Gozan, where they are to this day.

Manasseh is dealt with again in 7:14–19. How the two parts of the Manasseh record came to be separated is not now known.
5:23 The people of the half-tribe of Manasseh were, in any case, numerous and were settled in northern Transjordan from Bashan to Senir, which is Mount Hermon (Deut 3:9).
5:24 The seven tribal leaders mentioned here are not otherwise known. The descriptions of these men as “brave warriors, famous men, and heads of their families” are well known, but the first two names regularly have military associations. It is possible that the material came from an old military list.
5:25 Because they were “unfaithful to the God of their fathers and prostituted themselves to [local gods],” they went into exile at the hands of the Assyrians. The Chronicler here sets up a contrast to 5:20, which records a victory by the tribes across the Jordan during the reign of Saul (5:10). Why were they victorious over the Hagrites and yet taken captive by Assyria? The obvious answer might be that the Assyrians were a greater power than the Hagrites, but this would not be the correct answer. The real reason for the demise of the Transjordan tribes is that instead of calling on the Lord as they had done some three hundred years earlier (5:20), they committed apostasy against him. These two incidents form a microcosm of the Chronicler’s philosophy of history.
5:26 King Pul of Assyria is here identified as Tiglath-Pileser III (745–727 B.C.; cf. 2 Kgs 15:19, 29). The Chronicler notes that representatives of the three Transjordan tribal groups were led into exile. Other lists of the areas to which they were exiled come in 2 Kgs 17:6 and 18:11 although Hara is absent from these lists, and many commentators delete Hara as a corruption of “the river of” or “the mountains of Maday [Media].” But Halah, Habor, and the river of Gozan are well known in Upper Mesopotamia. These exiles were still there in the days of the Chronicler. Unfaithfulness (v. 25) has an inevitable consequence, the judgment of God.


5. The Tribe of Levi (6:1–81)

The tribe of Levi was one of the three tribes that occupied the central place in the thinking of the Chronicler. It was one of the tribes that in his view remained faithful to the Davidic kingship and to temple worship in the preexilic period. Far more attention is given to their genealogy than to the other tribes (Naphtali has one verse, 7:13). Levi was scattered throughout “all Israel” and was in every era their clergy. In the words of Wilcock, “Levi thus provides a religious leadership which acts as a binding force through the length of Israel’s history and the breadth of its territory.”
Also the tribe of Levi represented Israel’s central concern, the worship of God. The temple and its rituals stood at the heart of Israel’s life. It was the tribe of Levi that cared for the temple and administered its rituals. No doubt the Chronicler owed something to the Book of Numbers when he placed Levi in the center of the genealogies of Israel, for, according to Numbers, the tribes of Israel as they were encamped in the wilderness were arranged in a square with the clans of Levi in the center around the tabernacle (Num 1:44–2:34). Moses, Aaron, and his sons “were responsible for the care of the sanctuary on behalf of the Israelites” (Num 3:38).
First Chronicles 6 is comprised of several different lists dealing with priests and Levites and their positions and functions. The material is prefaced by an account of the high-priestly line from Levi (v. 1) to the exile (v. 15).


(1) The Line of the High Priests (6:1–15)

    1 The sons of Levi:
    Gershon, Kohath and Merari.
    2 The sons of Kohath:
    Amram, Izhar, Hebron and Uzziel.
    3 The children of Amram:
    Aaron, Moses and Miriam.
    The sons of Aaron:
    Nadab, Abihu, Eleazar and Ithamar.
    4 Eleazar was the father of Phinehas,
    Phinehas the father of Abishua,
    5 Abishua the father of Bukki,
    Bukki the father of Uzzi,
    6 Uzzi the father of Zerahiah,
    Zerahiah the father of Meraioth,
    7 Meraioth the father of Amariah,
    Amariah the father of Ahitub,
    8 Ahitub the father of Zadok,
    Zadok the father of Ahimaaz,
    9 Ahimaaz the father of Azariah,
    Azariah the father of Johanan,
    10 Johanan the father of Azariah (it was he who served as priest in the
    temple Solomon built in Jerusalem),
    11 Azariah the father of Amariah,
    Amariah the father of Ahitub,
    12 Ahitub the father of Zadok,
    Zadok the father of Shallum,
    13 Shallum the father of Hilkiah,
    Hilkiah the father of Azariah,
    14 Azariah the father of Seraiah,
    and Seraiah the father of Jehozadak.
    15 Jehozadak was deported when the LORD sent Judah and Jerusalem into exile by the hand of Nebuchadnezzar.

In vv. 1–15 we have listed the sons of Levi who were the high priests in the preexilic period. The list here is based on Exod 6:16–25. The Chronicler adds little detail. He has a vertical chronology and moves through this to Jehozadak, who was deported by Nebuchadnezzar (v. 15). His list is the most extensive found in the Old Testament as well as the latest. Even so, several high priests are omitted here, including Jehoiada (2 Chr 22:11–24:17), Azariah (2 Chr 26:20), and Uriah (2 Kgs 16:11ff.). Azariah (v. 9) according to 1 Kgs 4:2 is the son of Zadok, not the grandson. This difference is due, no doubt, because complete lists were not always made. It was sufficient to preserve the line.
In the arrangement of the names of the Levites in this chapter, the first place is given to the priests (vv. 1–15). Then vv. 16–30 dealing with the three Levitical families are closely related to the temple musicians in vv. 31–48. This arrangement is artificially constructed since not all the material that was available to the Chronicler was used. But he was making a point. The perfectly arranged, artistic pattern of priests and Levites gave a special significance to the priestly family and stressed the importance of the temple and its rituals in the life of God’s people.
6:1 [5:27] “Gershon” sometimes is written as “Gershom” (cf. Gen 6:16–17). The Chronicler, however, used “Gershom” on occasion (1 Chr 23:15–16; 26:4) but “Gershon” on others (cf. 1 Chr 6:1, 16–17, 20, 43, 62; 15:7; 23:6; 2 Chr 26:21; 29:12).
6:2–9 [5:28–35] The line of Kohath that followed via Amram and Aaron to ensure that the very important figure of Zadok was preserved.
6:10–15 [5:36–41] With this reference we have twelve generations between Aaron and the building of the temple. This would give twelve times forty, or four hundred and eighty years to agree with 1 Kgs 6:1. This is a feasible reconstruction. The expression “the father,” which appears several times in these verses, is best understood as denoting succession in office.


(2) The Sons of Levi (6:16–30) [6:1–15]

    16 The sons of Levi:
    Gershon, Kohath and Merari.
    17 These are the names of the sons of Gershon:
    Libni and Shimei.
    18 The sons of Kohath:
    Amram, Izhar, Hebron and Uzziel.
    19 The sons of Merari:
    Mahli and Mushi.
    These are the clans of the Levites listed according to their fathers:
    20 Of Gershon:
    Libni his son, Jehath his son, Zimmah his son, 21 Joah his son, Iddo his son, Zerah his son and Jeatherai his son.
    22 The descendants of Kohath:
    Amminadab his son, Korah his son, Assir his son, 23 Elkanah his son, Ebiasaph his son, Assir his son,
    24 Tahath his son, Uriel his son, Uzziah his son and Shaul his son.
    25 The descendants of Elkanah:
    Amasai, Ahimoth,
    26 Elkanah his son, Zophai his son, Nahath his son, 27 Eliab his son, Jeroham his son, Elkanah his son and Samuel his son.
    28 The sons of Samuel:
    Joel the firstborn and Abijah the second son.
    29 The descendants of Merari:
    Mahli, Libni his son, Shimei his son, Uzzah his son,
    30 Shimea his son, Haggiah his son and Asaiah his son.

6:16–24 [6:7–9] Whereas the line of high priests is preserved in a vertical chronology, ignoring other lines of descent, in this section the three lines of Levi are followed up, namely, those of Gershon, Kohath, and Merari. Of these Gershon (v. 20) and Merari (v. 29) are followed for seven generations through the line of the elder sons Libni (v. 17) and Mahli (v. 19). The Kohath tradition develops through Amminadab for ten generations.
Amminadab is otherwise unknown. He is not listed among the sons of Kohath in v. 18 or elsewhere. Because Exod 6:21 has Korah as the son of Izhar, it may be that Izhar originally stood in the place of Amminadab in this verse (cf. vv. 18, 38). There may be further problems as well, accounting for the ten generations of Kohath compared to the pattern of seven for Gershon and Merari.
6:25 [6:10] Ahimoth is possibly to be read “and his brother Mehath.” A slight emendation is necessary (cf. v. 35).
6:26 [6:11] It is noteworthy that Samuel is placed among the Levites, since 1 Sam 1:1 says his ancestor Zuph (here Zophai) was an Ephraimite. Either Samuel was a Levite whose family was from the territory of Ephraim (cf. Josh 21:20–22), or he was an Ephraimite who was reckoned with or “adopted” into the Levites because of his services in the tabernacle and the performance of certain priestly duties (1 Sam 2:11, 26; 3:15; 7:9–10). In the latter case, vv. 26–28 is considered a parenthesis in the surrounding genealogy.
6:28 [6:13] “Joel” is absent in the MT but is present in the LXX and in MT of 1 Sam 8:2. Although “firstborn” without a name is still appropriate, the NIV supplies the information to aid the reader.


(3) The Temple Musicians (6:31–47)

31 These are the men David put in charge of the music in the house of the LORD after the ark came to rest there. 32 They ministered with music before the tabernacle, the Tent of Meeting, until Solomon built the temple of the LORD in Jerusalem. They performed their duties according to the regulations laid down for them.

    33 Here are the men who served, together with their sons:
    From the Kohathites:
    Heman, the musician,
    the son of Joel, the son of Samuel,
    34 the son of Elkanah, the son of Jeroham,
    the son of Eliel, the son of Toah,
    35 the son of Zuph, the son of Elkanah,
    the son of Mahath, the son of Amasai,
    36 the son of Elkanah, the son of Joel,
    the son of Azariah, the son of Zephaniah,
    37 the son of Tahath, the son of Assir,
    the son of Ebiasaph, the son of Korah,
    38 the son of Izhar, the son of Kohath,
    the son of Levi, the son of Israel;
    39 and Heman’s associate Asaph, who served at his right hand:
    Asaph son of Berekiah, the son of Shimea,
    40 the son of Michael, the son of Baaseiah,
    the son of Malkijah, 41 the son of Ethni,
    the son of Zerah, the son of Adaiah,
    42 the son of Ethan, the son of Zimmah,
    the son of Shimei, 43 the son of Jahath,
    the son of Gershon, the son of Levi;
    44 and from their associates, the Merarites, at his left hand:
    Ethan son of Kishi, the son of Abdi,
    the son of Malluch, 45 the son of Hashabiah,
    the son of Amaziah, the son of Hilkiah,
    46 the son of Amzi, the son of Bani,
    the son of Shemer, 47 the son of Mahli,
    the son of Mushi, the son of Merari,
    the son of Levi.

6:31–32 [6:16–17] These introductory verses refer to David, who set up and organized the Levitical musical guilds for worship in the tabernacle, later transferred to the temple. These men were charged with ministering with music before the tabernacle until Solomon built the temple. They performed their duties according to the regulations laid down for them. There are the strongest traditions in the Bible that David was associated with music. Some of these are quite early (e.g., 2 Sam 6:5; 23:1). Several early stories tell of David playing the harp to Saul in 1 Samuel. By analogy with other systems of worship in other lands, Israel would have had its own equivalent of cultic music in which David the great reformer naturally played his part. The Chronicler mentions David more than once in connection with temple music (1 Chr 15:16, 27; 25:1ff.; 2 Chr 29:26ff.) The tradition of David’s influence on tabernacle and temple is strongly represented in the headings to many of the psalms.
6:33–38 [6:18–23] The Kohath group of singers is traced from Heman through Joel, Samuel, and others back to Levi, son of Israel (v. 38). The family of Samuel is clearly a part of this list of twenty-two generations. The list is longer than the next two lists, those of Asaph (v. 39) and the Merarites (v. 44). This list in vv. 33–38 is virtually the same as that in vv. 22–27, although there are some variations.
6:39–43 [6:24–28] The name “Asaph” appears on a seal found at Megiddo belonging to the time of Jeroboam II (ca. 786–746 B.C.). The source of this list is not known although there are some parallels with vv. 20–21.
6:44–47 [6:29–32] At the top of the list is Ethan, traced through Merari’s younger son Mushi (v. 46) back to Levi.


(4) The Chief Duties of the Levites and the Priests (6:48–49)

48 Their fellow Levites were assigned to all the other duties of the tabernacle, the house of God. 49 But Aaron and his descendants were the ones who presented offerings on the altar of burnt offering and on the altar of incense in connection with all that was done in the Most Holy Place, making atonement for Israel, in accordance with all that Moses the servant of God had commanded.

6:48–49 [6:33–34] Aaron and his descendants made atonement for sin. The verb “to make atonement” was of special theological significance. Basically the verb root kpr means “to cover,” i.e., “to cover over sin,” by the offering of a sacrifice whether for individuals (Lev 4:29, 31; 8:24; 10:17) or for the entire people on the day of atonement (Lev 16, esp. v. 14). Sin must be covered over in order that it not be an affront to God. But the atonement can only be done in the manner prescribed by God as he gave directions to his servant, Moses. Human efforts to deal with sin are of no avail.


(5) The List of the High Priests (6:50–53)

    50 These were the descendants of Aaron:
    Eleazar his son, Phinehas his son, Abishua his son, 51 Bukki his son, Uzzi his son, Zerahiah his son,
    52 Meraioth his son, Amariah his son, Ahitub his son, 53 Zadok his son and Ahimaaz his son.

6:50–53 [6:35–38] The high priests are listed from Aaron down to David, repeating the list from 6:3–8. Certainly this is tied to vv. 31–32. The priests David put in charge of worship were descendants of Aaron.


(6) The List of Levitical Cities (6:54–81)

54 These were the locations of their settlements allotted as their territory (they were assigned to the descendants of Aaron who were from the Kohathite clan, because the first lot was for them):
    55 They were given Hebron in Judah with its surrounding pasturelands. 56 But the fields and villages around the city were given to Caleb son of Jephunneh.
57 So the descendants of Aaron were given Hebron (a city of refuge), and Libnah, Jattir, Eshtemoa, 58 Hilen, Debir, 59 Ashan, Juttah and Beth Shemesh, together with their pasturelands. 60 And from the tribe of Benjamin they were given Gibeon, Geba, Alemeth and Anathoth, together with their pasturelands.
These towns, which were distributed among the Kohathite clans, were thirteen in all.
61 The rest of Kohath’s descendants were allotted ten towns from the clans of half the tribe of Manasseh.
62 The descendants of Gershon, clan by clan, were allotted thirteen towns from the tribes of Issachar, Asher and Naphtali, and from the part of the tribe of Manasseh that is in Bashan.
63 The descendants of Merari, clan by clan, were allotted twelve towns from the tribes of Reuben, Gad and Zebulun.
64 So the Israelites gave the Levites these towns and their pasturelands. 65 From the tribes of Judah, Simeon and Benjamin they allotted the previously named towns.
66 Some of the Kohathite clans were given as their territory towns from the tribe of Ephraim.
67 In the hill country of Ephraim they were given Shechem (a city of refuge), and Gezer, 68 Jokmeam, Beth Horon, 69 Aijalon and Gath Rimmon, together with their pasturelands.
70 And from half the tribe of Manasseh the Israelites gave Aner and Bileam, together with their pasturelands, to the rest of the Kohathite clans.
    71 The Gershonites received the following:
    From the clan of the half-tribe of Manasseh they received Golan in Bashan and also Ashtaroth, together with their
    pasturelands;
    72 from the tribe of Issachar they received Kedesh, Daberath, 73 Ramoth and Anem, together with their pasturelands;
    74 from the tribe of Asher they received Mashal, Abdon, 75 Hukok and Rehob, together with their pasturelands;
    76 and from the tribe of Naphtali they received Kedesh in Galilee, Hammon and Kiriathaim, together with their pasturelands.

    77 The Merarites (the rest of the Levites) received the following:
    From the tribe of Zebulun they received Jokneam, Kartah, Rimmono and Tabor, together with their pasturelands;
    78 from the tribe of Reuben across the Jordan east of Jericho they received Bezer in the desert, Jahzah, 79 Kedemoth and Mephaath, together with their pasturelands;
    80 and from the tribe of Gad they received Ramoth in Gilead, Mahanaim, 81 Heshbon and Jazer, together with their pasturelands.

This list is parallel to Josh 21:5–39. Both lists combine the cities of refuge with the Levitical cities and follow the familiar pattern of allotment to the Kohathites, the Gershonites, and the Merarites in that order. The Aaronite line is represented by Kohath, followed by Gershon, the oldest of Levi’s sons, and Merari, the youngest son. The Levites, as we will see, were scattered through the tribal territory of Israel. They were important to the life and well being of the whole nation (“all Israel”).
6:54–59 [6:39–44] The list of allotments to the descendants of Aaron is now given. These are their dwelling places throughout their settlements in their territory given by lot to the sons of Aaron from the Kohathite clan, to whom, according to Josh 21:10, the first lot fell.
The Aaronites were given Hebron in Judah and the surrounding pasture lands. The fields of the city and the villages were given to Caleb. The nine cities of vv. 55–59 seem to be the combined contribution of Simeon and Judah (v. 65; Josh 21:4, 9). However, Simeon is not mentioned, although Ashan (v. 59) is attributed to Simeon in Josh 19:7. This may point to the early absorption of Simeon by Judah. The writer considers it significant that Hebron was a city of refuge.
6:60 [6:45] The contribution of Benjamin is listed here, three towns each with its common lands. The text names thirteen though the Chronicler lists only eleven. Juttah and Gibeon can be restored to vv. 59 and 60 on the basis of Josh 21:16–17.
6:61 [6:46] This completes the list, giving the rest of the Kohathite allotment—ten cities from the half-tribe of Manasseh. Some commentators suggest the restoration of Ephraim and Dan with Josh 21:5.
6:62 [6:47] Issachar, Asher, Naphtali, and the half-tribe of Manasseh that was in Bashan provided thirteen towns for the descendants of Gershon.
6:63 [6:48] Twelve towns from Reuben, Gad, and Zebulun were for Merari.
6:64–65 [6:49–50] The children of Israel gave cities and common lands to the Levites. It was God’s special provision for those who had been set apart for the service of the temple.
6:66–70 [6:51–55] The Kohathites, comprising the descendants of Aaron and the “remaining Kohathites,” had their allotted cities in the center of the land, that of the Aaronites in Judah and Benjamin and the “remaining Kohathites” in Ephraim, Dan, and West Manasseh.
6:71–77 [6:56–62] The cities of the Gershonites were allotted, two in east Manasseh, four each from Issachar and Asher, and three in Naphtali.
6:78–81 [6:63–66] The cities of Merari were in Zebulun, Reuben, and Gad.




(3) The Successful Transfer of the Ark to Jerusalem (15:1–16:6)

1 After David had constructed buildings for himself in the City of David, he prepared a place for the ark of God and pitched a tent for it. 2 Then David said, “No one but the Levites may carry the ark of God, because the LORD chose them to carry the ark of the LORD and to minister before him forever.”
3 David assembled all Israel in Jerusalem to bring up the ark of the LORD to the place he had prepared for it. 4 He called together the descendants of Aaron and the Levites:
    5 From the descendants of Kohath,
    Uriel the leader and 120 relatives;
    6 from the descendants of Merari,
    Asaiah the leader and 220 relatives;
    7 from the descendants of Gershon,
    Joel the leader and 130 relatives;
    8 from the descendants of Elizaphan,
    Shemaiah the leader and 200 relatives;
    9 from the descendants of Hebron,
    Eliel the leader and 80 relatives;
    10 from the descendants of Uzziel,
    Amminadab the leader and 112 relatives.
    11 Then David summoned Zadok and Abiathar the priests, and Uriel, Asaiah, Joel, Shemaiah, Eliel and Amminadab the Levites. 12 He said to them, “You are the heads of the Levitical families; you and your fellow Levites are to consecrate yourselves and bring up the ark of the LORD, the God of Israel, to the place I have prepared for it. 13 It was because you, the Levites, did not bring it up the first time that the LORD our God broke out in anger against us. We did not inquire of him about how to do it in the prescribed way.” 14 So the priests and Levites consecrated themselves in order to bring up the ark of the LORD, the God of Israel. 15 And the Levites carried the ark of God with the poles on their shoulders, as Moses had commanded in accordance with the word of the LORD.
16 David told the leaders of the Levites to appoint their brothers as singers to sing joyful songs, accompanied by musical instruments: lyres, harps and cymbals.
17 So the Levites appointed Heman son of Joel; from his brothers, Asaph son of Berekiah; and from their brothers the Merarites, Ethan son of Kushaiah; 18 and with them their brothers next in rank: Zechariah, Jaaziel, Shemiramoth, Jehiel, Unni, Eliab, Benaiah, Maaseiah, Mattithiah, Eliphelehu, Mikneiah, Obed-Edom and Jeiel, the gatekeepers.
19 The musicians Heman, Asaph and Ethan were to sound the bronze cymbals; 20 Zechariah, Aziel, Shemiramoth, Jehiel, Unni, Eliab, Maaseiah and Benaiah were to play the lyres according to alamoth, 21 and Mattithiah, Eliphelehu, Mikneiah, Obed-Edom, Jeiel and Azaziah were to play the harps, directing according to sheminith. 22 Kenaniah the head Levite was in charge of the singing; that was his responsibility because he was skillful at it.
23 Berekiah and Elkanah were to be doorkeepers for the ark. 24 Shebaniah, Joshaphat, Nethanel, Amasai, Zechariah, Benaiah and Eliezer the priests were to blow trumpets before the ark of God. Obed-Edom and Jehiah were also to be doorkeepers for the ark.
25 So David and the elders of Israel and the commanders of units of a thousand went to bring up the ark of the covenant of the LORD from the house of Obed-Edom, with rejoicing. 26 Because God had helped the Levites who were carrying the ark of the covenant of the LORD, seven bulls and seven rams were sacrificed. 27 Now David was clothed in a robe of fine linen, as were all the Levites who were carrying the ark, and as were the singers, and Kenaniah, who was in charge of the singing of the choirs. David also wore a linen ephod. 28 So all Israel brought up the ark of the covenant of the LORD with shouts, with the sounding of rams’ horns and trumpets, and of cymbals, and the playing of lyres and harps.
29 As the ark of the covenant of the LORD was entering the City of David, Michal daughter of Saul watched from a window. And when she saw King David dancing and celebrating, she despised him in her heart.
1 They brought the ark of God and set it inside the tent that David had pitched for it, and they presented burnt offerings and fellowship offerings before God. 2 After David had finished sacrificing the burnt offerings and fellowship offerings, he blessed the people in the name of the LORD. 3 Then he gave a loaf of bread, a cake of dates and a cake of raisins to each Israelite man and woman.
4 He appointed some of the Levites to minister before the ark of the LORD, to make petition, to give thanks, and to praise the LORD, the God of Israel: 5 Asaph was the chief, Zechariah second, then Jeiel, Shemiramoth, Jehiel, Mattithiah, Eliab, Benaiah, Obed-Edom and Jeiel. They were to play the lyres and harps, Asaph was to sound the cymbals, 6 and Benaiah and Jahaziel the priests were to blow the trumpets regularly before the ark of the covenant of God.

The setback at Perez-uzzah delayed the return of the ark to Jerusalem. The account is based on 2 Sam 6:12–20. The Chronicler, however, gives the story a different perspective in several respects. David’s intention always was to bring the ark back to Jerusalem despite delays. He needed to prepare a home for the ark (15:1) and also to order and prepare the Levites for their task. This could not be hurried. It was not simply that David sought blessings similar to those enjoyed by Obed-Edom, in whose home the ark had rested. David had a deeper purpose. The ark was to be brought to Jerusalem irrespective of any hope for his own personal blessing.
Further, the Chronicler stresses the work of the Levites. They were to have special duties after the ark had found a resting place, namely, to take responsibility for the music of Israel’s worship (6:31–32). The Chronicler shows that David had initiated the plans that Solomon brought to fruition. The bearers of the ark became the temple singers in a later day (16:4–40). But already in David’s day the plans had been laid (15:11–22). The Chronicler stressed certain elements in which David was involved: the preparation of a place for the ark to rest, the appointment of singers and musical instruments, and the preparation of the vestments to be worn by the Levites.
The most arresting feature of this narrative is not obvious to the modern reader. The Chronicler was devoting great time and attention to describing incidents surrounding the ark and the need to treat it as a holy object even though by the time of the Chronicler it had already ceased to exist. In other words, the original readers of this book had no more opportunity to worship God before the ark than we do. Why would the Chronicler stress the joy and holiness associated with it if his readers would never have opportunity to emulate David’s obedience?
The answer must be that for the Chronicler it was not the object itself but what the object represented that mattered. The ark represented two great truths. First, God was with them and would go with them wherever they went. The ark traveled with the exodus generation, was with Joshua’s generation as they entered Canaan, and had been in various locations now in their land. Second, the ark represented the holiness of God. It contained the tablets of the Ten Commandments—the essence of the law—and they had seen for themselves that God’s ark was not to be trifled with (13:10). These two truths, that God is with us and that God is holy, are what really mattered to the Chronicler. We need to keep this in mind lest we think of the Chronicler simply as one full of nostalgia for the good old days. Finally, the chapter teaches God’s compassionate forgiveness in allowing Israel a second chance. Israel’s initial failure was not final and God’s judgment was not just positive but instructive.
We can discern the steps taken to restore the ark to Jerusalem. The narrative becomes the occasion for spelling out the organization and installation of the Levitical families and in particular the temple musicians (15:1–24). The arrival of the ark in Jerusalem (15:25–16:3) was celebrated by the gathering of “all Israel” and the singing of a lengthy hymn by the Asaphites (16:4–36), after which the priests and Levites were assigned their various duties (16:37–42). Once this was complete, the scene was set for a new stage in the story of the ark and the history of King David and Israel.
15:1–3 These verses are unique to the Chronicler. Important aspects of the preparations for bringing the ark to Jerusalem were: (1) the ark and its tent, (2) the role of the Levites, and (3) the reassembling of “all Israel.”
The buildings David erected for himself were a palace and other yet-unnamed structures. Details of these were not regarded as particularly important. The focus is on the place he had prepared for the ark of God and the tent he had pitched for it although details about the nature of this tent are not given (cf. 2 Sam 6:17). This must have been a new construction. The old Mosaic tabernacle was still at Gibeon (16:39; 2 Chr 1:3; cf. 1 Kgs 8:4). The term “place” often carries overtones of a holy place.
Great care had to be taken that the proper personnel, namely, the Levites, should carry the ark. Their failure to do this at the first attempt at its removal to Jerusalem was the reason for the failure of that attempt. The law of Deut 10:8 was clear in this respect (Num 4:1–18). Transport by ox-cart was fraught with danger. The Chronicler, however, here stressed the significance of the Levites in temple worship (cf. 16:4–7; 2 Chr 5–6).
“All Israel” (v. 3) was assembled in Jerusalem to bring up the ark of the Lord to the place prepared for it. It was a national occasion.
15:4–10 The three Levitical groups—Kohath, Merari, and Gershon, and the numbers of their families—are mentioned along with descendants of three other families—Elizaphan, Hebron, and Uzziel, who must have attained sufficient numbers or prestige to gain independent status. They all derive from Kohath (Exod 6:18, 22). This sixfold division of Levites is otherwise unknown and may represent an updated statement nearer to the time of the Chronicler. The name of Joel (v. 7) is lacking in the list of Gershonites in 6:16–30 but is present at 23:8 and 26:22. However, Hebron and Uzziel (vv. 9–10) are not listed elsewhere as heads of Levitical families though they may have been descendants of Kohath (6:18; Exod 6:22).
The work of the Levites is in focus in this list although priests and Levites are associated in vv. 11, 14. Not until 16:39–40 is the distinctive work of the priests taken up as they presented burnt offerings to the Lord on the altar of burnt offerings.
15:11–15 The religious leaders were then summoned—the priests, Zadok and Abiathar, and six Levites. The Levites, who carried the ark, were charged to consecrate themselves before they brought up the ark to the place prepared for it (v. 12). The Chronicler offers an explanation for the failure to bring up the ark earlier, which caused the Lord to break forth in anger against Israel. Ritual propriety and action according to the regulations laid down were always important but particularly to the Chronicler. These things helped to guarantee an appreciation for the sanctity and sovereignty of God.
The priests and Levites alike consecrated themselves for the significant task of bringing up the ark of Yahweh, the God of Israel. The Levites carried the ark with the poles on their shoulders according to the word the Lord delivered through Moses (Exod 25:13–15; Num 7:9). Even in matters of ritual it is important to follow God’s directions.
15:16–24 Having brought up the ark to its place, it was time for the people to break out into joyous celebration with the help of singers and musical instruments. It had been a joyous occasion when David was accepted as king over all Israel (12:39–40). Now with the ark restored, the note of joy is sounded again (15:16, 25). So vv. 16–24 lay stress on the singing of joyful songs accompanied by music. Arrangements were necessarily interim in character until the temple was built. Continuing worship was being enjoyed at the sanctuary in Gibeon (2 Chr 1:3). Priestly personnel were appointed for the sacrificial system to be operated according to the Torah (16:40), and two of the Levitical guilds, those of Heman and Jeduthun, were commissioned to carry out a musical ministry (16:42). Asaph came to be a composer of Psalms (cf. 16:4–5; Pss 73–83).
Three lists of Levitical personnel are in chaps. 15–16: (1) 15:17–18; (2) 15:19–24; (3) 16:5–6, the longest being 15:19–24. It is difficult now to account for the differences. Lists (1) and (2) give some indication of the instruments some individuals used. We cannot now be sure why the Chronicler included parts of three different lists, although no doubt each in its way was authentic. The list of Levites may be divided into three groups according to the instruments they played.
15:16 We can probably see here the practice of family tradition. Certain families were specialists in particular instruments, much as they were in wider life. The leaders of the Levites were to appoint their “brothers” as singers and musicians. That David was an originator of musical guilds and services is well known.
15:17–18 Most of these names are known in other Levitical lists although the question of identity is uncertain. Some occurrences have slight changes; for example, “Kushaiah” (v. 17) appears as “Kishi” in 6:44; and Obed-Edom (v. 18), who appears as a Levitical musician in v. 21 and 16:5, later has a change of status to gatekeeper (26:1–11). This was not necessarily a demotion.
15:19–24 The Levites who provided music are here listed as players of bronze cymbals, lyres, and harps. A number of technical terms used here have been variously understood. The doorkeepers for the ark seem to have been a special group not included in the list in v. 16. Seven priests were to blow trumpets before the ark of God (cf. Num 10:8; 31:6; Neh 12:35, 41).
15:25 David, the elders of Israel, and the commanders of units of a thousand went to bring up the ark of the covenant of the Lord from the house of Obed-Edom. David was not operating alone but in cooperation with other leaders of Israel. The “all Israel” motif is clear, as is the motif of joy.
15:26–27 Samuel had referred to “the bearers of the ark” (2 Sam 6:13, NASB) and to “shouts and the sound of trumpets” (v. 15). Chronicles makes clear that it was the Levites who carried the ark and also refers to the singers, their leader (v. 27), and the wide range of instruments usually associated with the Levites and priests (v. 28). God responded to Israel’s ritual faithfulness by helping the Levites in their duty of carrying the ark. The sacrifices were then an expression of thanks for God’s help.
The question about who offered the sacrifices may be asked. This was normally a priestly act. The fact that David was clothed in “a robe of fine linen” (v. 27), which is also described as a “linen ephod,” as did the Levites who carried the ark, has raised the question of whether David had assumed priestly garments. The wearing of the ephod was restricted to the high priest in the Chronicler’s day (Exod 28:4ff.; Lev 8:7). In the parallel text in 2 Sam 6:14, 20 the reference may be to a loin cloth, which would explain Michal’s rebuke. The occasion was special, and the full temple rituals were yet in the future when the rituals and offices could be regulated.
Probably we should see some priestly function for David here, but not as a pretext for Israelite kings to assume Levitical prerogatives. This was, in the history of Israel, an exceptional but significant event. David functioned as the type for the Messiah as a king who is also a priest.
15:28 “All Israel” thus transported the ark of the covenant of Yahweh with music and shouts of joy.
15:29 The Chronicler’s perspective on Michal is slightly different than that of the longer account in 2 Sam 6:16, 20, 23. There it might appear that Michal’s reaction to David’s behavior was motivated by jealousy and by a misinterpretation of David’s motive. But here it is clear that like her father, Saul, Michal had no appreciation for the things of God.
16:1–3 Following the parallel record in 2 Sam 6:17–19, the Chronicler describes the successful conclusion of the task of restoring the ark. Here again David was involved in the presentation of burnt offerings and fellowship offerings before God. Then he blessed the people in the name of the Lord and presented them with gifts: a loaf of bread, a cake of dates, and a cake of raisins to each. Some translators take the Hebrew of “cake of dates” to mean a “portion” (of meat).
The Levitical ministrations are next set out (16:4–42). Until the temple had been dedicated, the sacrificial aspects of Israel’s worship were confined to the altar at Gibeon (vv. 39–40). In the passage before us the Levites, whom David appointed to minister before the ark of the covenant, performed restricted duties.
16:4 The Levites’ main responsibilities were the musical aspects of worship: to make petitions through psalms of lament, to give thanks in thanksgiving psalms, and to praise the Lord, the God of Israel, in song. Elements of each of these three are to be found in the composite psalm of Asaph and his associates in vv. 8–36.
16:5–6 Only some of those listed in 15:16–22 are listed in these verses. The others evidently were engaged at Gibeon (v. 41).
In a passage concerned with Levites the reference to priests may seem out of place. But since the general context is concerned with music and not with the sacrificial aspects of priestly duties, the priestly task of blowing the trumpets before the ark of the covenant is all that is required. The priest Benaiah was mentioned in 15:24, although his companion, Jaheziel, is not mentioned there.




6. The Tribes of Issachar, Benjamin, Naphtali, Manasseh, Ephraim, and Asher (7:1–40)

These may be classified broadly as the northern tribes. The preceding chapters have dealt with Judah, Simeon, Reuben, Gad, the half-tribe of Manasseh, and Levi with its priestly and Levitical families and their possessions and dwelling areas. But in giving the total picture of Israel to the postexilic community, mention had to be made of the northern tribes of Issachar, Benjamin, Naphtali, Manasseh, Ephraim, and Asher. The Chronicler still needed to give more detail about Benjamin. He devoted some space in 7:6–12 but reserved a much fuller treatment for chap. 8.
Chapter 7 consists of smaller genealogies within the framework of the Chronicler’s major interests of Judah, Levi, and Benjamin. The source of this material was largely Numbers 26, but something was culled from a military census list. The order of presentation escapes us now. It may have been the order he found in his sources, which were in any case inadequate. They had to be “supplemented” from available archives, largely contemporary Judean. There is nothing about Dan or Zebulun despite a brief notice in 2:1–2 (but see comments at 7:12). Yet during the periods of exile, that of the northern tribes in the Assyrian exile of 721 B.C. and of the tribes of Judah, Benjamin, and Levi in the Babylonian exile in the Nebuchadnezzar period, by no means all the people of Israel were taken from the land even if only “the poorest people of the land” remained (2 Kgs 24:14). At least some memories must have remained even if detailed records were lost. The conviction of the Chronicler was that “all Israel” mattered (1 Chr 9:1; 11:1; 12:38; 13:5–8; 14:8; 15:3; 17:6; 18:14; 21:4; 28:4; 29:25–26; 2 Chr 1:2; 7:6; 9:30; 12:1, 13).
An interesting possibility is that the Chronicler had his own way of maintaining the ideal of twelve tribes. If Dan is restored by emending 7:12, then only Zebulun is missing. If Levi and the two Joseph tribes are all included in the list, then the total number for the tribes is twelve. If Dan is considered to be absent but the two half-tribes of Manasseh are each counted separately, the number of tribes again is twelve. Elsewhere in the Bible there are different ways of maintaining the number twelve for the tribes of Israel. Revelation 7:5–8, for example, omits Dan but counts Manasseh and Joseph (Ephraim).
Another feature about the Chronicler’s teaching regarding the whole area Israel once covered is that this people was the God-appointed occupant of certain areas of Western Asia. God promised the land to the patriarchs (Gen 28:13–15; 35:12; Deut 6:10–11; 8:7–10). The two categories, “the people” and “the land,” were inseparable. The extent of the land was “from the river of Egypt to the great river, the Euphrates” (Gen 15:18–20). That was the promise. It was not always realized, but it stood as an ideal. It was by no means confined to the narrow limits defined by postexilic Judah. For the postexilic “Israel” the land that was promised comprised the whole tribal area, and the people comprised the whole tribal spectrum. The Chronicler therefore included six northern tribes.


(1) The Tribe of Issachar (7:1–5)

    1 The sons of Issachar:
    Tola, Puah, Jashub and Shimron—four in all.
    2 The sons of Tola:
    Uzzi, Rephaiah, Jeriel, Jahmai, Ibsam and Samuel—heads of their families. During the reign of David, the descendants of Tola listed as fighting men in their genealogy numbered 22,600.
    3 The son of Uzzi:
    Izrahiah.
    The sons of Izrahiah:
    Michael, Obadiah, Joel and Isshiah. All five of them were chiefs. 4 According to their family genealogy, they had 36,000 men ready for battle, for they had many wives and children.
    5 The relatives who were fighting men belonging to all the clans of Issachar, as listed in their genealogy, were 87,000 in all.

7:1–5 This list is to be compared with Num 26:23–25 and Gen 46:13. The Chronicler’s text and these texts contain some variants. “Puah” occurs as “Puwwah” in Numbers and Jashub as Job in Genesis. It is common to find various spellings of names in the Old Testament. Four sons of Issachar are listed, and the fighting strength of one of them, Tola, is given for the time of David (v. 2). Numbers of fighting men are also given for some of the other descendants of Tola, and reference is made to their many wives and children. Probably a military census is behind this material.


(2) The Tribe of Benjamin (7:6–12)

    6 Three sons of Benjamin:
    Bela, Beker and Jediael.
    7 The sons of Bela:
    Ezbon, Uzzi, Uzziel, Jerimoth and Iri, heads of families—five in all. Their genealogical record listed 22,034 fighting men.
    8 The sons of Beker:
    Zemirah, Joash, Eliezer, Elioenai, Omri, Jeremoth, Abijah, Anathoth and Alemeth. All these were the sons of Beker. 9 Their genealogical record listed the heads of families and 20,200 fighting men.
    10 The son of Jediael:
    Bilhan.
    The sons of Bilhan:
    Jeush, Benjamin, Ehud, Kenaanah, Zethan, Tarshish and Ahishahar. 11 All these sons of Jediael were heads of families. There were 17,200 fighting men ready to go out to war.
    12 The Shuppites and Huppites were the descendants of Ir, and the Hushites the descendants of Aher.

7:6–11 Benjamin is given a brief introduction here. A fuller treatment is reserved for chap. 8. The MT is peculiar here. It starts with the word “Benjamin,” breaking the pattern “the sons of Benjamin.” These introductory words evidently have dropped out through haplography. Otherwise vv. 6–11 are presented normally with the genealogies of the three sons Bela, Beka, and Jediael following one another. Attention is paid again to fighting men (vv. 7, 9, 11). The numbers are not round numbers but exact numbers, suggesting a dependence on a census list no longer available to us.
7:12 The Shuppites and Huppites probably are to be identified with the sons of Benjamin mentioned in Gen 46:21 and the Shephupham and Hupham in Num 26:39. We noted earlier that Dan seems to be missing. One commentator has proposed an emendation at the end of v. 12 to give a reading “the sons of Dan: Hushim, his son, one.” This is rejected by other commentators.


(3) The Tribe of Naphtali (7:13)

    13 The sons of Naphtali:
    Jahziel, Guni, Jezer and Shillem—the descendants of Bilhah.

7:13 The sons of Naphtali are exactly the same as those in Gen 46:24–25 and Num 26:48–49. The Chronicler notes that these were the sons of Bilhah, one of Jacob’s concubines. It is a very truncated genealogy. Perhaps this did not matter to the Chronicler. He was satisfied to mention the tribe of Naphtali, filling in a gap in the tribal list of “all Israel.” Such lacunae (i.e., gaps) are known elsewhere, as for example in the cases of Zebulun and Dan (but see comment on 7:12).


(4) The Tribe of Manasseh (7:14–19)

    14 The descendants of Manasseh:
    Asriel was his descendant through his Aramean concubine. She gave birth to Makir the father of Gilead. 15 Makir took a wife from among the Huppites and Shuppites. His sister’s name was Maacah.
    Another descendant was named Zelophehad, who had only daughters.
    16 Makir’s wife Maacah gave birth to a son and named him. His brother was named Sheresh, and his sons were Ulam and Rakem.
    17 The son of Ulam:
    Bedan.
    These were the sons of Gilead son of Makir, the son of Manasseh. 18 His sister Hammoleketh gave birth to Ishhod, Abiezer and Mahlah.
    19 The sons of Shemida were: Ahian, Shechem, Likhi and Aniam.

7:14–19 The tribe of Manasseh was split into two sections, one in Transjordan (5:23–26) and one in Cisjordan, which is described in the present passage. The list is drawn from various sources. The Chronicler evidently knew the census list of Num 26:29–33 and the allotment list of Josh 17:1–13, but there are some difficulties here.
Maacah is named as the sister of Makir in v. 15 but as his wife in v. 16. Makir took a wife from among the Huppites and Shuppites (v. 15). How are these related to the people of v. 12 who were the descendants of Ir? Again the MT in v. 15 refers to “the second” who was named Zelophehad. Who was the “first”? Also the Gilead of v. 16 is not referred to in the list of vv. 16–17a. Some textual abbreviation or faulty transmission has been suggested by many commentators.
Some points of special interest to us may be noted. According to Joshua 17, Makir was given territory in Gilead and Bashan and the remaining “sons of Manasseh” were settled west of Jordan, as is clear from names such as Shechem and Tirzah. Some of the names here, Shemida, Abiezer, and Helek, occur in the Samaria ostraca. A tradition of descendants of Manasseh in Transjordan has been met in 5:23–26. We find here, also, a further indication of Israelite links with Arameans. After the rise of Aram-Damascus there was, of course, open conflict.


(5) The Tribe of Ephraim (7:20–29)

    20 The descendants of Ephraim:
    Shuthelah, Bered his son, Tahath his son, Eleadah his son, Tahath his son, 21 Zabad his son and Shuthelah his son.
    Ezer and Elead were killed by the native-born men of Gath, when they went down to seize their livestock. 22 Their father Ephraim mourned for them many days, and his relatives came to comfort him. 23 Then he lay with his wife again, and she became pregnant and gave birth to a son. He named him Beriah, because there had been misfortune in his family. 24 His daughter was Sheerah, who built Lower and Upper Beth Horon as well as Uzzen Sheerah.
    25 Rephah was his son, Resheph his son,
    Telah his son, Tahan his son,
    26 Ladan his son, Ammihud his son, Elishama his son, 27 Nun his son and Joshua his son.

28 Their lands and settlements included Bethel and its surrounding villages, Naaran to the east, Gezer and its villages to the west, and Shechem and its villages all the way to Ayyah and its villages. 29 Along the borders of Manasseh were Beth Shan, Taanach, Megiddo and Dor, together with their villages. The descendants of Joseph son of Israel lived in these towns.

This pericope is composed of three major parts: (1) the genealogy from Ephraim to Joshua (vv. 20–21a, 25–27); (2) a historical notice concerning the birth of Beriah which interrupts the genealogy of Joshua (vv. 21b–24); and (3) a list of villages occupied by the sons of Joseph (vv. 28–29).
7:20–21 The genealogy reaching from Ephraim to Joshua is presented as a vertical genealogy of the form “X, his son Y, his son Z,” in itself a unity though interrupted by the mention of Ezer and Elead in v. 21b, who were killed by the native-born men of Gath when they went down to seize their livestock. The Gath mentioned here probably is the Gittaim of 2 Sam 4:3 rather than Gath, one of the Philistine cities. The “native-born” men were literally “those who were born in the land,” natives and not migrants.
7:22 Ephraim had only one brother, so the translation “relatives” (lit., “brothers”) in the NIV is correct.
7:23–24 Ephraim’s wife subsequently became pregnant with a son, whom they named Beriah “because misfortune had come upon his house” (NASB). The Heb. for Beriah, bĕrîʿâ, is a wordplay on “misfortune,” bĕrāʿâ. The daughter of Beriah, Sheerah, is credited with the building of Lower and Upper Beth-Horon as well as the unidentified Uzzen Sheerah. These towns represent the limit of Ephraim’s westward expansion. They evidently lay close together.
7:25–27 The vertical chronology of Ephraim’s descendants continues to Joshua.
7:28–29 The material on Manasseh and Ephraim is here drawn together into a section that gives the dwelling places of the descendants of Joseph (cp. Josh 16–18). The Chronicler himself was not greatly concerned with problems of historical geography. His point was made when he had provided a picture of God’s people in their land. Only modern scholars have concerned themselves with such details. Nevertheless, v. 28 is in general agreement with Josh 16:5–10, which gives the cities of Ephraim, and v. 29 follows Josh 17:11 for the cities of Manasseh. The list represents the southern and northern boundaries of the territory of Ephraim-Manasseh. Bethel was conquered by Joseph’s tribes (Judg 1:22) and was regarded as a boundary city (Josh 16:1–2; 18:13) and as belonging to Benjamin (Josh 18:22). Shechem was within the limits of Manasseh (Josh 17:7ff.) but assigned to Ephraim (Josh 20:7). It was a city of refuge for the central tribes and was shared between Ephraim, Manasseh, and Benjamin. The line from Naaran (Naarath) to Gezer runs near Bethel. The line on the north from Beth-shean via Taanach and Megiddo to Dor is clear.


(6) The Tribe of Asher (7:30–40)

    30 The sons of Asher:
    Imnah, Ishvah, Ishvi and Beriah. Their sister was Serah.
    31 The sons of Beriah:
    Heber and Malkiel, who was the father of Birzaith.
    32 Heber was the father of Japhlet, Shomer and Hotham and of their sister Shua.
    33 The sons of Japhlet:
    Pasach, Bimhal and Ashvath. These were Japhlet’s sons.
    34 The sons of Shomer:
    Ahi, Rohgah, Hubbah and Aram.
    35 The sons of his brother Helem:
    Zophah, Imna, Shelesh and Amal.
    36 The sons of Zophah:
    Suah, Harnepher, Shual, Beri, Imrah, 37 Bezer, Hod, Shamma, Shilshah, Ithran and Beera.
    38 The sons of Jether:
    Jephunneh, Pispah and Ara.
    39 The sons of Ulla:
    Arah, Hanniel and Rizia.

40 All these were descendants of Asher—heads of families, choice men, brave warriors and outstanding leaders. The number of men ready for battle, as listed in their genealogy, was 26,000.

7:30–40 Asher was a peripheral tribe, descended from Zilpah, the handmaid of Leah (Gen 46:17). Evidently they furnished a useful body of fighters for Israel’s army, 26,000, a reduced number from the 41,500 of Num 1:40–41; 2:27–28, and 53,400 of Num 26:47, perhaps reflecting accurately the situation at a later date.


7. The Tribe of Benjamin (8:1–9:1a)

    1 Benjamin was the father of Bela his firstborn,
    Ashbel the second son, Aharah the third,
    2 Nohah the fourth and Rapha the fifth.
    3 The sons of Bela were:
    Addar, Gera, Abihud, 4 Abishua, Naaman, Ahoah, 5 Gera, Shephuphan and Huram.
    6 These were the descendants of Ehud, who were heads of families of those living in Geba and were deported to Manahath:
    7 Naaman, Ahijah, and Gera, who deported them and who was the father of Uzza and Ahihud.
    8 Sons were born to Shaharaim in Moab after he had divorced his wives Hushim and Baara. 9 By his wife Hodesh he had Jobab, Zibia, Mesha, Malcam, 10 Jeuz, Sakia and Mirma. These were his sons, heads of families. 11 By Hushim he had Abitub and Elpaal.
    12 The sons of Elpaal: Eber, Misham, Shemed (who built Ono and Lod with its surrounding villages),13 and Beriah and Shema, who were heads of families of those living in Aijalon and who drove out the inhabitants of Gath.
    14 Ahio, Shashak, Jeremoth, 15 Zebadiah, Arad, Eder, 16 Michael, Ishpah and Joha were the sons of Beriah.
    17 Zebadiah, Meshullam, Hizki, Heber, 18 Ishmerai, Izliah and Jobab were the sons of Elpaal.
    19 Jakim, Zicri, Zabdi, 20 Elienai, Zillethai, Eliel, 21 Adaiah, Beraiah and
    Shimrath were the sons of Shimei.
    22 Ishpan, Eber, Eliel, 23 Abdon, Zicri, Hanan, 24 Hananiah, Elam, Anthothijah, 25 Iphdeiah and Penuel were the sons of Shashak.
    26 Shamsherai, Shehariah, Athaliah, 27 Jaareshiah, Elijah and Zicri were the sons of Jeroham.
28 All these were heads of families, chiefs as listed in their genealogy, and they lived in Jerusalem.

29 Jeiel the father of Gibeon lived in Gibeon. His wife’s name was Maacah, 30 and his firstborn son was Abdon, followed by Zur, Kish, Baal, Ner, Nadab, 31 Gedor, Ahio, Zeker 32 and Mikloth, who was the father of Shimeah. They too lived near their relatives in Jerusalem.

33 Ner was the father of Kish, Kish the father of Saul, and Saul the father of Jonathan, Malki-Shua, Abinadab and Esh-Baal.
    34 The son of Jonathan:
    Merib-Baal, who was the father of Micah.
    35 The sons of Micah:
    Pithon, Melech, Tarea and Ahaz.
    36 Ahaz was the father of Jehoaddah, Jehoaddah was the father of Alemeth, Azmaveth and Zimri, and Zimri was the father of Moza. 37 Moza was the father of Binea; Raphah was his son, Eleasah his son and Azel his son.
    38 Azel had six sons, and these were their names:
    Azrikam, Bokeru, Ishmael, Sheariah, Obadiah and Hanan. All these were the sons of Azel.
    39 The sons of his brother Eshek: Ulam his firstborn, Jeush the second son and Eliphelet the third. 40 The sons of Ulam were brave warriors who could handle the bow. They had many sons and grandsons—150 in all.
    All these were the descendants of Benjamin.

    1 All Israel was listed in the genealogies recorded in the book of the kings of Israel.

The tribe of Benjamin is mentioned briefly in 7:6–12, where the Chronicler probably continued the source he was using for Issachar in 7:1–5. But he felt he needed to give a more extended treatment of the tribe of Benjamin to conclude his Judah-Levi-Benjamin concept for the framework that enclosed the whole of Israel. Indeed, the Chronicler gave a great deal of attention to Benjamin. In his mind the Southern Kingdom, composed of Judah and Benjamin, was the legitimate “Israel” because of the Davidic monarchy. Similarly, the tribe of Levi was the legitimate clergy (in contrast to the nonlevitical priesthood of Jeroboam).
Even a cursory reading of this chapter reveals significant differences between this genealogy of Benjamin and that in 7:6–12. The formula used is “A fathered B,” as distinct from “the sons of A were …” This list is similar to Num 26:38–41 whereas the list in 7:6–12 is closer to Gen 46:21, but no two lists of Benjamin’s sons are the same. Here and in Numbers, Benjamin is credited with five sons. In 7:6 there were only three. Only the name “Bela” appears in all four lists.
The material here is composite. Thus after vv. 7, 12, 28 there are breaks in the genealogy, and the subsections include geographical material. Do we have here parallel lists of Benjamite families at particular periods of time? Another proposal is that the genealogy of Saul (vv. 29–40) may reflect the social and ethnic background of Gibeon at the end of the monarchy. There are different types of material in the chapter: (a) the sons of Benjamin (vv. 1–5) and the sons of Ehud at Geba (vv. 6–7); (b) the sons of Shaharaim in Moab, Ono, and Lod (vv. 8–12); (c) the Benjamites in Aijalon, Gath, and Jerusalem (vv. 13–28); (d) the Benjamites in Gibeon and Jerusalem (vv. 29–32); (e) the genealogy of Saul (vv. 33–40).
Elsewhere in the Old Testament the Benjamites are linked with other tribal groups like Ephraim and Manasseh (Num 2:18–24), although the border between Benjamin and Ephraim fluctuated. The border with Judah also fluctuated (2 Chr 11:1, 3, 10, 12, 23; 14:8; 15:2, 8–9; 25:5).
8:1–2 Several of the names in this passage occur in the Genesis and Numbers genealogies. Benjamites are associated with Ehud of Geba (v. 6). The present-day Jiba lies about six miles north of Jerusalem. The deportation of the sons of Ehud to Manahath cannot now be placed historically. Was Ehud the Benjamite judge of Judg 3:15?
8:3–5 The reference to two sons of Bela each named Gera may point to a scribal slip. A feasible emendation is to read, “Gera, even the father of Ehud.” Then v. 6a follows smoothly, “These were the descendants of Ehud.”
8:6 While no independent reference to this deportation is known and by whom the deportation was carried out, it is possible that the Benjamites expelled the native inhabitants to Manahath in Judah (cf. 2:52, 54). A similar expulsion of the inhabitants of Gath is mentioned in 2:13. There must have been numerous such expulsions in ancient times.
8:7 There may be some confusion in the Hebrew text here. Some commentators omit Naaman and Ahijah as a duplication of Naaman and Ahoah (almost identical to Ahijah in Heb. in v. 4). But the text is difficult to follow. So also is v. 7b. The NIV gives a widely accepted translation.
8:8–12 Moab broke free from Israel eventually. This reference may be concerned with earlier times when some people of Israel lived in Moab, as in the days of Ruth (Ruth 1) and David (1 Sam 22:3–4). We cannot be specific in the absence of other details. There is no information elsewhere that Benjamin had any connection with Moab. The name “Mesha” is used of a king of Moab on the Mesha stele (cf. 2 Kgs 3:4).
The Shaharaim of v. 9 had marital problems and divorced two women, one of whom, Hushim, was the mother of Elpaal, who gave rise to a genealogy (vv. 12–13). The use of the verb “built” raises a question. The towns Ono and Lod are known in Egyptian records from the days of Thutmose III (1490–1436 B.C.) before Israelite times. “Built” here must mean “rebuilt,” or “fortified.” Certainly Ono and Lod were resettled in the postexilic period (Ezra 2:33; Neh 7:37; 11:35) by families who had lived there formerly. These towns are in the west of the land, and the question arises about how they could be counted in Benjamin. In earlier times they were in Dan and later in Ephraim. In Josh 19:40–46 Dan is “opposite Joppa” (NRSV). It is possible that the area of Dan was absorbed by Judah and Ephraim and, since Judah coalesced with Benjamin about the time of the division of the kingdom, it is feasible that Ono and Lod could be seen as part of Benjamin since the returning exiles were said to have gone back to their former places (Ezra 2:1). Benjamites lived at Ono and Lod (Neh 11:35).
8:13–28 These verses refer to Benjamites living in Aijalon who “drove out the inhabitants of Gath” (v. 13), possibly Gittaim. At least two of these, Beriah and Shema, were heads of families. Aijalon was assigned to Dan (Josh 19:42) but lay on Ephraim’s border. It was fortified by Rehoboam (2 Chr 11:10) but was taken by the Philistines in the reign of Ahaz (2 Chr 28:18). The fact that Benjamites lived in Jerusalem (v. 28) shows how closely Judah and Benjamin were linked after the division of the kingdom.
For “Ahio” (wʾḥyw; v. 14) the LXX reads “and their brothers” (translating wʾḥyhm). The text then reads “their brothers were Shashak, Jeremoth, Arad, Zebadiah … the sons of Beriah.” The sons of Elipaal follow in vv. 17–18. “Shimei” (v. 21) is the same as the Shema of v. 13. “Jeroham” (v. 27) probably is the same as Jeremoth of v. 14.
The summarizing note in v. 28 compares with 9:34; in both the claim is made that certain individuals lived in Jerusalem. Benjamites and Judahites during the period of the divided monarchy tended to mix in the same location. Jerusalem lay on the border between Judah and Benjamin. It may seem that v. 28 refers only to the sons listed in vv. 15–26 and not to v. 13 or vv. 6–12, yet the all-inclusive nature of v. 28 is clear. The Hebrew text reads literally “the heads of the fathers according to their generations, heads.” To clinch the point that their dwelling place was Jerusalem, this phrase is now the normal one covering all Benjamite settlements (cf. 9:3 and the symbolic statements of 8:32 and 9:38).
8:29–40 The rest of chap. 8 deals with the Benjamites centered in Gibeon, the well-known el-Jib, six miles northwest of Jerusalem, assigned to Benjamin in Josh 18:25. These people helped rebuild the walls of Jerusalem after the exile (Neh 3:7). It was resettled in Nehemiah’s time (Neh 7:25). The list combines both vertical and horizontal elements. Failure to appreciate this has led some scholars to deny unity to the section. S. Waters argues that the line of Saul is given a geographical rather than a genealogical connection to the tribe of Benjamin here. This serves to imply that Saul was unfit to rule Israel.
The word “father” (v. 29) may mean “civic leader” or “military leader.” The individual “Jeiel” is lacking in the Hebrew text. It is restored on the basis of the LXX (cf. 9:35). The name of his wife, “Maacah,” suggests a link with an Aramean (non-Israelite) group. It was from this union that Kish, the father of Saul, came (v. 30).
The name “Baal” (v. 30) points to an early origin of this section since in later days it was anathema (cf. 5:5). “Ner” is restored by the NIV in front of Nadab following some LXX manuscripts and 1 Chr 9:36. He was the father of Kish, the father of Saul (v. 33). In v. 30 Ner is named as brother of Kish. That is not an impossible scenario since Ner may well have given his son the name of his own brother. But in any case the very name Kish provided a good reason to introduce the family of Saul (vv. 33–40).
From v. 32 it seems that some of the people of Gibeon moved to Jerusalem, but how many is not specified.
Saul’s family continues to v. 40. It is taken up again in 9:35–10:14. The name Esh-Baal (“man of Baal”) is known as Ishvi in 1 Sam 14:49 and Ishbosheth (“man of shame”) in 2 Sam 2:8 and elsewhere. This latter name is used to cover up religious scruples because pious Israelites objected to the name Baal and made a theological correction to the name (the LXX has “Ishyo, man of the Lord”). This genealogy is the most extensive one for Saul in the Hebrew Bible. It shows fifteen generations.
The name “Merib-Baal” (v. 34; “Baal contends”) provides another example of the abhorred name “Baal.” “Baal” was probably left on these names to cast a shadow over the Saulide family. In other words, the Chronicler subtly offers a condemnation of the reign of Saul.
Merib-Baal’s son Mica (2 Sam 9:12) evidently was of some significance. Four sons are mentioned, the fourth of whom was Azel, whose six sons are mentioned in v. 38. The list from v. 35 on is paralleled in 9:35–44, taken from an unknown source. This brings the genealogy down to somewhere near the exile. The names in vv. 29–40 do not occur at the end of chap. 9. They are unattached to the preceding verses and may have come from a military list. The sons of Eshek lead into a list of brave warriors who could handle the bow.
The extensive listing of the Benjamites in chap. 8 reflects the widespread interest in that tribe in the postexilic period. The widespread locations where Benjamites were to be found—Geba, Moab, Ono, Lod, Gibeon, and Jerusalem itself—indicates that over the centuries members of this tribe were scattered through other tribal areas.
9:1a The conclusion to Israel’s genealogical lists is brief. It refers only to the official register of Israel’s families and their situations. The northern tribes had been deported to foreign parts (5:25–26), but finally the state of Judah, despite the presence of the temple in its midst as a witness to God and to his claim on their lives, suffered the unthinkable. Judah too was carried away to Babylon because of their unfaithfulness (cf. 6:15). They too knew the mental anguish of displaced people, torn from their roots, far from home and from God. But their God could reach out and restore them and their city and their land. That is the story that follows in subsequent chapters in Chronicles.


8. The Postexilic Community (9:1b–34)

The people of Judah were taken captive to Babylon because of their unfaithfulness. 2 Now the first to resettle on their own property in their own towns were some Israelites, priests, Levites and temple servants.
3 Those from Judah, from Benjamin, and from Ephraim and Manasseh who lived in Jerusalem were:
    4 Uthai son of Ammihud, the son of Omri, the son of Imri, the son of Bani, a descendant of Perez son of Judah.
    5 Of the Shilonites:
    Asaiah the firstborn and his sons.
    6 Of the Zerahites:
    Jeuel.
    The people from Judah numbered 690.
    7 Of the Benjamites:
    Sallu son of Meshullam, the son of Hodaviah, the son of Hassenuah;
    8 Ibneiah son of Jeroham; Elah son of Uzzi, the son of Micri; and Meshullam son of Shephatiah, the son of Reuel, the son of Ibnijah.
    9 The people from Benjamin, as listed in their genealogy, numbered 956. All these men were heads of their families.
    10 Of the priests:
    Jedaiah; Jehoiarib; Jakin;
    11 Azariah son of Hilkiah, the son of Meshullam, the son of Zadok, the son of Meraioth, the son of Ahitub, the official in charge of the house of God;
    12 Adaiah son of Jeroham, the son of Pashhur, the son of Malkijah; and Maasai son of Adiel, the son of Jahzerah, the son of Meshullam, the son of Meshillemith, the son of Immer.
13 The priests, who were heads of families, numbered 1,760. They were able men, responsible for ministering in the house of God.
    14 Of the Levites:
    Shemaiah son of Hasshub, the son of Azrikam, the son of Hashabiah, a Merarite; 15 Bakbakkar, Heresh, Galal and Mattaniah son of Mica, the son of Zicri, the son of Asaph; 16 Obadiah son of Shemaiah, the son of Galal, the son of Jeduthun; and Berekiah son of Asa, the son of Elkanah, who lived in the villages of the Netophathites.
    17 The gatekeepers:
    Shallum, Akkub, Talmon, Ahiman and their brothers, Shallum their chief 18 being stationed at the King’s Gate on the east, up to the present time. These were the gatekeepers belonging to the camp of the Levites. 19 Shallum son of Kore, the son of Ebiasaph, the son of Korah, and his fellow gatekeepers from his family (the Korahites) were responsible for guarding the thresholds of the Tent just as their fathers had been responsible for guarding the entrance to the dwelling of the LORD. 20 In earlier times Phinehas son of Eleazar was in charge of the gatekeepers, and the LORD was with him. 21 Zechariah son of Meshelemiah was the gatekeeper at the entrance to the Tent of Meeting.
22 Altogether, those chosen to be gatekeepers at the thresholds numbered 212. They were registered by genealogy in their villages. The gatekeepers had been assigned to their positions of trust by David and Samuel the seer. 23 They and their descendants were in charge of guarding the gates of the house of the LORD—the house called the Tent. 24 The gatekeepers were on the four sides: east, west, north and south. 25 Their brothers in their villages had to come from time to time and share their duties for seven-day periods. 26 But the four principal gatekeepers, who were Levites, were entrusted with the responsibility for the rooms and treasuries in the house of God. 27 They would spend the night stationed around the house of God, because they had to guard it; and they had charge of the key for opening it each morning.
28 Some of them were in charge of the articles used in the temple service; they counted them when they were brought in and when they were taken out. 29 Others were assigned to take care of the furnishings and all the other articles of the sanctuary, as well as the flour and wine, and the oil, incense and spices. 30 But some of the priests took care of mixing the spices. 31 A Levite named Mattithiah, the firstborn son of Shallum the Korahite, was entrusted with the responsibility for baking the offering bread. 32 Some of their Kohathite brothers were in charge of preparing for every Sabbath the bread set out on the table.
33 Those who were musicians, heads of Levite families, stayed in the rooms of the temple and were exempt from other duties because they were responsible for the work day and night.
34 All these were heads of Levite families, chiefs as listed in their genealogy, and they lived in Jerusalem.

9:1b It would seem that 9:1a refers to the preexilic period and that the reference to “the kings of Israel” is an all-inclusive reference to kings, whether from political Judah or political Israel, who ruled over God’s people. However, with 9:1b we are clearly concerned with Judah. Just as in 1 Chronicles 1 there is a line of election that narrows down to Israel and his sons (2:1), so here the postexilic community represents a narrowing of “all Israel” to the people of Judah who were taken to Babylon. Because of their “unfaithfulness” judgment fell, a concept used several times by the Chronicler. The basic structure of chap. 9 is paralleled by Nehemiah 11, although there are numerous differences in detail. In fact, the differences are extensive enough to conclude that whatever the original source, they probably came to the writers by different channels or by independent choice of the materials offered.
9:2–3 The Hebrew text allows for more than one translation—“the first living on their property,” “the first citizens who returned to their property” (understanding the verb as haššābîm, “return,” rather than the MT hayyôšĕbîm, “live”), “the first to resettle” (NIV). Regardless, the verse is a reference to the returning exiles. The term “Israelite” here seems to mean laypeople because the text proceeds to distinguish priests, Levites, and temple servants. The last group, described as “temple servants” or nĕtînîm, is often referred to in Ezra and Nehemiah (Ezra 2:43; 7:7, 24; 8:20). These are known as a social class in texts from ancient Ugarit, where they were temple slaves. Perhaps they originally were foreigners captured in war and may have been gatekeepers or other types of functionaries (cf. vv. 17–21). The Chronicler himself did not refer to them elsewhere by name. The mention of Ephraim and Manasseh living in Jerusalem with those from Judah and Benjamin may be intended to show that the postexilic community was representative of “all-Israel,” not simply of Judah and Benjamin.
9:4–6 The returnees from Judah are listed under the names of the patriarchs mentioned in 2:3–4, Perez, Shelah, and Zerah. The idea of a continuity from ancient times is presented. The Shilonites were descendants of Shelah. Numbers 26:20 refers to them as Shelanites. The number 690 contrasts with 468 in Neh 11:6, which, however, does not refer to Zerah. The LXX names vary somewhat.
9:7–9 Chronicles names four family heads with a total of 956 people. This list differs considerably from Neh 11:7–9, which mentions only one line of descent. As F. C. Fensham has written regarding the differences between 1 Chronicles 9 and Nehemiah 11: “We might presume that various genealogical lists were present in the archives. Each author made use of it in his own way, omitting material which he did not regard as relevant and adding new material to bring the list up to date. It is also clear that with the transmission of genealogical lists many scribal errors had crept in.” E. H. Merrill also notes that since we do not know the basis for the Chronicler’s 956 or Nehemiah’s 928 (Neh 11:8), “we cannot account for the differences.”
9:10–13 The passage is comparatively close to Neh 11:10–14 although it is abbreviated and shows spelling differences.
9:14–16 The list of Levites is now given, a little longer than the list in Nehemiah 11. The reason may be that it is an updating. The families of Shemaiah, Mattaniah, and Obadiah are singled out for special mention. These were descended from the chief Levitical families of Merari, Asaph, and Jeduthun. Netophath was somewhere near Jerusalem. The villages of the Netophathites were the home of Levitical singers (Neh 12:28). The town is closely identified with Bethlehem (2:54; Ezra 2:21–22; Neh 7:26) and is sometimes identified with a site some three and a half miles southeast of Bethlehem.
9:17–19 Four gatekeepers are listed by name: Shallum, Akkub, Talmon, and Ahiman, though there were others. Shallum was chief and occupied an especially honored position as the gatekeeper of the east gate through which the king usually entered (cf. Ezek 46:2). This gate faced the entrance to the sanctuary. These gatekeepers were reckoned with the Levites (v. 26; 1 Chr 23:4). They formed a separate class in the list of priests, Levites, gatekeepers, and temple slaves in several places. They were Korahites. These verses stress the Levitical descent of the gatekeepers (vv. 18b, 26). Their task was “guarding the thresholds of the tent [ʾôhel] just as their fathers had” (v. 19).
9:20 In earlier times Phinehas [the high priest] son of Eleazar was in charge of the gatekeepers, and the LORD was with him.” This is an allusion to the heroic faith of Phinehas in Num 25:7–13. Because of his courageous opposition to the fertility cult of Baal, God gave him a “covenant of peace.”
9:21 Zechariah, son of Meshelemiah (cf. 26:2, 14), had duties at the north gate and the east gate respectively. Perhaps Zechariah succeeded his father. These chief gatekeepers had charge of the gates on the four sides and apparently lived in Jerusalem. Their brothers (assistants) lived in their villages (v. 23). According to 26:12–18, there was a total of twenty-four guard posts to be manned all the time in relays of a week each.
9:22–26a In all there were 212 gatekeepers. This assignment had been undertaken by David and Samuel the seer. Samuel, of course, died before David (1 Sam 25:1; 28:3), so the statement has to be understood in a general sense. Samuel’s influence was far reaching because he strove to guard the purity of Israel’s worship in his day.
9:26b–34 There is a break in the prescriptions at v. 26b. The emphasis changes from the specific duties of the gatekeepers to a more general discussion of the duties of the Levites. This can be made clearer by translating vv. 25–26a: “Their brothers in their villages had to come from time to time and share their duties for seven-day periods because they were faithful. The four chief gatekeepers were Levites.” The general outline of Levitical duties follows, beyond that of being gatekeepers. In addition to the opening of the temple each morning, they also were responsible for the implements used in the temple service, the care of the furnishings and all other articles of the sanctuary, and the handling of the flour, wine, oil, incense, and spices.
An actual list of Levitical singers is not provided. They were, in any case, exempt from other duties because they were responsible for the work day and night. In this respect they were not outdone by the gatekeepers who also ministered day and night (Ps 134; Isa 30:29). Verse 34 is a transitional verse between the Levitical musicians and the genealogy of Saul. It is preparatory to the accounts of the death of Saul related in chap. 10.
Chapter 9 begins with a sad testimony to sin and judgment (v. 1). Not only had the northern tribes been deported to foreign lands (5:25–26), but now Judah, despite the presence of the temple in its midst as a witness to God and to his claim on the people, was carried away captive to Babylon because of their unfaithfulness. But with God, there is hope of a return. The passage from vv. 2–24 is the story of a restored people in a restored city and land. The Chronicler, with his overall concern for the Davidic monarchy from David to Zedekiah, takes a moment to concern himself with the postexilic period. The whole history of God’s people is the story of fresh starts by God’s grace. God always picks up the broken pieces and puts them together again. There is ever a way back to God, and so it proved again in the sixth century B.C. Chapter 9 gives evidence of a continuation of God’s purposes for Israel.




II. SAUL (9:35–10:14)


The reigns of Saul, David, and Solomon over a united Israel were of great concern to the Chronicler. About half of his total space is taken up with the story of these three kings. The material is concerned with the abortive period of Saul, which is dealt with in brief compass, followed by a major consideration of David (1 Chr 11–29, nineteen chapters), and a substantial consideration of Solomon (2 Chr 1–9, nine chapters).
The Chronicler hardly could ignore Saul—he was too closely connected to David and too well known as the first king—but clearly Saul was not at the center of his interest. The history in Samuel, by contrast, devotes enormous attention to Saul (1 Sam 9–2 Sam 1). For the Chronicler, the disobedient Saul (v. 13) was if anything a foil meant to show the faithfulness of David.


1. The Ancestry of Saul (9:35–44)

35 Jeiel the father of Gibeon lived in Gibeon. His wife’s name was Maacah,36 and his firstborn son was Abdon, followed by Zur, Kish, Baal, Ner, Nadab, 37 Gedor, Ahio, Zechariah, and Mikloth. 38 Mikloth was the father of Shimeam. They too lived near their relatives in Jerusalem.
39 Ner was the father of Kish, Kish the father of Saul, and Saul the father of Jonathan, Malki-Shua, Abinadab, and Esh-Baal.
40 The son of Jonathan:
    Merib-Baal, who was the father of Micah.
41 The sons of Micah:
    Pithon, Melech, Tahrea, and Ahaz.
42 Ahaz was the father of Jadah, Jadah was the father of Alemeth, Azmaveth and Zimri, and Zimri was the father of Moza. 43 Moza was the father of Binea; Rephaiah was his son, Eleasah his son and Azel his son.
44 Azel had six sons, and these were their names: Azrikam, Bokeru, Ishmael, Sheariah, Obadiah and Hanan. These were the sons of Azel.

9:35–44 Before dealing with the story of Saul, the Chronicler repeats his genealogy from 8:29–38, although there are differences. This text has Ner between Baal and Nadab in v. 36; it includes the name “Mikloth” in v. 37, has “Shimeam” for Shimeah in v. 38, and adds Ahaz to the sons of Micah (v. 41). Some spellings also are different. It may seem unusual to us to repeat the genealogy of Saul, but in a sense it is quite appropriate as an introduction to 1 Chronicles 10.


2. Saul Takes His Own Life (10:1–14)

1 Now the Philistines fought against Israel; the Israelites fled before them, and many fell slain on Mount Gilboa. 2 The Philistines pressed hard after Saul and his sons, and they killed his sons Jonathan, Abinadab and Malki-Shua. 3 The fighting grew fierce around Saul, and when the archers overtook him, they wounded him.
4 Saul said to his armor-bearer, “Draw your sword and run me through, or these uncircumcised fellows will come and abuse me.”
But his armor-bearer was terrified and would not do it; so Saul took his own sword and fell on it. 5 When the armor-bearer saw that Saul was dead, he too fell on his sword and died. 6 So Saul and his three sons died, and all his house died together.
7 When all the Israelites in the valley saw that the army had fled and that Saul and his sons had died, they abandoned their towns and fled. And the Philistines came and occupied them.
8 The next day, when the Philistines came to strip the dead, they found Saul and his sons fallen on Mount Gilboa.9 They stripped him and took his head and his armor, and sent messengers throughout the land of the Philistines to proclaim the news among their idols and their people. 10 They put his armor in the temple of their gods and hung up his head in the temple of Dagon.
11 When all the inhabitants of Jabesh Gilead heard of everything the Philistines had done to Saul, 12 all their valiant men went and took the bodies of Saul and his sons and brought them to Jabesh. Then they buried their bones under the great tree in Jabesh, and they fasted seven days.
13 Saul died because he was unfaithful to the LORD; he did not keep the word of the LORD and even consulted a medium for guidance, 14 and did not inquire of the LORD. So the LORD put him to death and turned the kingdom over to David son of Jesse.

The narrative is based on 1 Samuel 31. The Chronicler does not devote space to Saul’s reign in its own right, although an assessment of his reign is provided in vv. 13–14. The Saul experiment ended in disaster, and Israel was left without a king, a state of affairs to be repeated in later days. Indeed, in the Chronicler’s day Israel had no king and no national independence but was under the rule of strangers. At this juncture on the death of Saul, David appeared on the scene. The people of the postexilic community, by analogy, could look for another deliverer from the line of David. Chapter 10 need not be seen as a later insertion. It is not merely a prelude to David’s reign but is a pattern of the way God acted for Israel.
10:1–2 While the story is based on 1 Samuel 31, it contains a few slight differences in wording, mostly stylistic.
10:3 Some translators render the text here in v. 3b in the passive, “He was wounded by the archers.”
10:4 There clearly was great apprehension in Saul’s mind about what his fate would be if he fell into the hands of the uncircumcised Philistines. Humiliation, torture, and mutilation surely would be likely to follow Saul’s capture. Death at his own hands or at the hands of his armor bearer would be preferable. Suicide practically was unknown in Israel although 1 Sam 31:3–6 has preserved the story of Saul’s own suicide. Second Samuel 1:10 has preserved the account of an Amalekite who claims to have killed Saul out of mercy. The Amalekite was apparently lying, and, as a result, David had the Amalekite put to death.
10:5–8 The point is made several times in these verses that Saul was dead. It is also stressed that his three sons died. So the dynasty of Saul had finally concluded. The army fled, the Israelites who lived in the valley of Jezreel abandoned their towns, and the Philistines took over.
As R. P. Gordon has pointed out (against Van Seters), the author of 1 Sam 31:2 understood that Saul was survived by his son Ishbosheth, and the Chronicler knew that as well (see note on 1 Chr 8:33). Whereas 1 Sam 31:6 says that Saul and three of his sons died “that same day,” the Chronicler, whose attention was on the end of the kingdom of Saul, added “and all his house.” But his omission of “that same day” shows that he was summarizing the consequent events to make the point that “the house of Saul as good as perished at Gilboa: Ishbosheth and his remnant Saulide kingdom counted for nothing from the perspective of later history.”
10:9–10 The Samuel account mentions the decapitation of Saul but does not include the detail that the head was put in the temple of Dagon along with his armor. The story in Chronicles, on the other hand, does not mention hanging Saul’s body on the wall of Bethshan (1 Sam 31:10). Excavations at Bethshan have brought to light several foreign temples from the Iron Age, the time of Saul’s death. One of these temples may have been the temple referred to here and in 1 Samuel.
10:11–12 The men of Jabesh Gilead displayed their loyalty to the house of Saul by removing the corpses of Saul and his sons and taking them to Jabesh. There they buried their bones under the great tree in Jabesh and held a fast for seven days.
10:13–14 The assessment of Saul’s reign is here given. Saul died because he was unfaithful to Yahweh. He did not keep Yahweh’s word and even consulted a medium for guidance (cf. 1 Sam 13:1–23; 15:1–35; 28:8–25). The charge of unfaithfulness is frequently employed by the Chronicler in reference to religious matters referring to the Jerusalem temple or the impurity of rituals (cf. 2 Chr 26:16, 18; 28:19, 22; 29:5–6, 19; 30:7; 33:19; 36:14). Such unfaithfulness would lead to military defeat and exile, which included the final exile of both the Northern and Southern Kingdoms (1 Chr 5:25–26; 9:1; 2 Chr 36:20). The consulting of a medium was as grievous an act of unfaithfulness as any ritual offense. The practice of consulting mediums was expressly forbidden in Israel (Deut 18:9–14; cf. 1 Sam 15:23). It was a phenomenon recognized by twittering communications from within a man (Lev 20:27; Isa 29:4).
Saul should have taken his problems to the Lord, but he did not “inquire” (šāʾal) of the Lord. It meant for him not merely seeking information but a deep dependence on God born out of a trustful attitude of personal faith and loyalty. Failure to inquire of the Lord on this occasion was a further indication of Saul’s whole attitude. Godly leadership is characterized by complete obedience to the Lord and by seeking guidance from him in faith. Saul failed on both counts.




III. DAVID (11:1–29:30)


With chap. 11 the Chronicler comes to the heart of his story: the rise of David and the establishment of the Davidic kingdom. The source of his material was 2 Sam 5:1–10. Some aspects of the full story are ignored. The long struggle of David with Saul (1 Sam 16–26) and the remnants of his kingdom (2 Sam 2–4) are left aside not because they were unimportant but because the Chronicler was concerned to develop the story of the legitimate line of Israel’s kings as represented by David and his successors. After Solomon these were represented by the kings of Judah.
The Chronicler’s religious purpose and the theological thrust of his work was to stress for the people of his own day the significance of David and the Davidic kingdom. What made the difference between Saul’s failure on the one hand and David’s and Solomon’s success on the other was seeking the Lord (cf. 1 Chr 13:3; 14:10, 16; 2 Chr 14:4). Furthermore, David had the task of reuniting the tribes into “all Israel,” but it was “all Israel” that raised David to the throne (11:1–9). After the defeat and death of Saul and the collapse of his house, David was recognized as the Lord’s anointed (11:1–3, 10; 12:23, 31, 38). If his military successes brought him honor, these were for Israel’s sake and in the will of God and according to his word (11:10; 12:23). A further point is stressed that at Hebron “all Israel” was involved. As “all Israel” had been united under David, they could be again, in a glorious future.
The account of David’s reign is generally much more favorable here than in 2 Samuel. This is not because the Chronicler was trying to hide something; he knew that his readers were familiar with the sordid stories of David’s sins. Rather, he wanted to forcefully present the equally true side of David, that he loved the Lord God with all his heart and provided an ideal for future kings to follow (cf. 2 Chr 29:2). M. Wilcock rightly remarks that David’s passing left a “David-shaped blank” that the Chronicler longed to see filled. His Davidic ideal is also a messianic ideal. “It is in that sense that much of the perspective of the books of Chronicles is messianic. They look forward with anticipation to the coming King who will bring in God’s final salvation and blessing.”
Stylistically, the device of chiasmus is used in presenting the story in 11:1 to 12:40.

    A      All Israel gathers 11:1–10
      B      According to God’s Word 11:10
      B´      According to God’s Word 12:23
    A´      All Israel gathers 12:23

Another chiasmus structure is found in 12:1–22. The Chronicler made use of this literary device more than once in the course of his work.


1. David’s Early Years (11:1–12:40)

(1) David Becomes King Over “All Israel” (11:1–3)

1 All Israel came together to David at Hebron and said, “We are your own flesh and blood. 2 In the past, even while Saul was king, you were the one who led Israel on their military campaigns. And the LORD your God said to you, ‘You will shepherd my people Israel, and you will become their ruler.’ ”
3 When all the elders of Israel had come to King David at Hebron, he made a compact with them at Hebron before the LORD, and they anointed David king over Israel, as the LORD had promised through Samuel.

The anointing of David is based on 2 Sam 5:1–3. The Chronicler omits any reference to the failure of Ishbosheth’s kingdom (2 Sam 2–4) because this was seen from the perspective of the final outcome as incidental.
11:1–3 David’s kingship was confirmed by national recognition, military success, and prophetic announcement. The “all Israel” theme is presented at once. The people recognized that they were David’s own flesh and blood. They were a unity under David, their legitimate head. This took place at Hebron. The Chronicler, however, did not see Hebron as David’s capital over a separate kingdom. David’s first children were born at Hebron merely because he lived there (3:1–9; 29:26–27). His short reign of seven years and six months at Hebron was nevertheless part of his forty-year reign over “all Israel.” God had appointed him to “shepherd” his people and to become their “ruler.” This term was used in preference to the term “king” in many passages because “king” often had unfortunate political overtones. In the covenant ceremony that followed, the people “anointed” David king over Israel according to the Lord’s promise through Samuel (2 Sam 7). God’s choice had been fulfilled. Wilcock sees four motifs in the people’s speech: (1) they recognized their oneness with David, (2) they acknowledged that by his achievements he had proved himself able to lead Israel, (3) they accepted him as king by anointing him, and (4) they confessed that all had been by the will and word of God.


(2) The Capture of Jerusalem (11:4–9)

4 David and all the Israelites marched to Jerusalem (that is, Jebus). The Jebusites who lived there 5 said to David, “You will not get in here.” Nevertheless, David captured the fortress of Zion, the City of David.
6 David had said, “Whoever leads the attack on the Jebusites will become commander-in-chief.” Joab son of Zeruiah went up first, and so he received the command.
7 David then took up residence in the fortress, and so it was called the City of David. 8 He built up the city around it, from the supporting terraces to the surrounding wall, while Joab restored the rest of the city. 9 And David became more and more powerful, because the LORD Almighty was with him.

No question of the chronology of events is involved in the placing of the capture of Jerusalem at this point in the story. The focus is rather political than chronological. A united Israel would need a center of government. This was to be Jerusalem. The religious significance of Jerusalem as the site of the temple came later.
11:4–5 David and all Israel went to Jerusalem, the Canaanite “Jebus,” a rocky site surrounded by valleys, which gave its occupants a great sense of security. With an irony born of confidence in God, the Chronicler could comment “nevertheless, David captured the fortress of Zion, the City of David.” That the stronghold would be taken was in the purpose of God. The mention of Jebusites is reminiscent of the early divine promises of possessing the land (e.g., Deut 7:1). The Chronicler considers it significant that David was the one to drive out these obstinate enemies (cf. Judg 1:21) and complete the task begun by Joshua. The reference to the blind and the lame found in 2 Sam 5:6 is lacking here. This was nevertheless an overconfident assertion by David’s opponents. The fortress was taken and became the city of David by right of conquest.
11:6 The place of Joab in this story raises some questions. David looked for someone to lead the attack on the Jebusite stronghold. That man would become commander-in-chief. The man was Joab, son of Zeruiah. The expression “went up first” has been variously understood. It may have been a general military expression common in Old Testament usage for the leader of an enterprise. Some commentators have seen in the words “he went up” an indication that he climbed up a Jebusite water shaft that led to the underground water supply for the city. Several such shafts that enabled inhabitants of walled Canaanite towns on hills above springs to reach the town water supply have been found.
One other possibility is that Joab gained entrance to the stronghold by frontal attack on the walls of the city without making use of the water shaft. A breach of the walls would call for a later repair (v. 7). Also a problem is the word translated “water shaft” in 2 Sam 5:8. Two main suggestions are offered, a water tunnel or a grappling hook. Either Joab scrambled up the water tunnel or attacked the surrounding wall of the stronghold with some siege tool. In the present state of our knowledge it is not possible to be dogmatic. Certainly Joab played a leading part in the capture of Jebus and held a significant place in David’s chain of command shortly after (2 Sam 8:16; 11:1). But he was to incur David’s displeasure when he murdered Abner, the previous commander (2 Sam 3:29; 1 Kgs 2:5–6).
11:7–8 David took up his residence in the fortress in due course. There are some exegetical difficulties in v. 8. In what sense did David “build up the city”? It was hardly a case of a total building but rather a repair. The archaeologist K. M. Kenyon has shown that on its eastern slope Jerusalem was supported by an elaborate system of terraces that required continuous repair. These “supporting terraces” are aptly noted in the NIV.
Another problem is the translation of the Hebrew text rendered in the NIV as “he built up the city around it, from the supporting terraces to the surrounding wall.” Only here in the Hebrew Bible does the noun sābîb have the article. Normally this noun is in the plural and means “the surroundings.” The NIV translates it “the surrounding wall.” The NEB renders the phrase “starting at the Millo [supporting terraces] and including its neighbourhood.” Emendations to the text suggest “as far as the palace.” A degree of uncertainty remains about the exact meaning. Clearly the city of David needed both repair and extension. Joab also was involved in the repair work and is said to have literally “restored to life” the rest of the city.
11:9 David was becoming stronger all the time because the “LORD Almighty” was with him.


(3) David’s Mighty Men (11:10–47)

10 These were the chiefs of David’s mighty men—they, together with all Israel, gave his kingship strong support to extend it over the whole land, as the LORD had promised—11 this is the list of David’s mighty men:
Jashobeam, a Hacmonite, was chief of the officers; he raised his spear against three hundred men, whom he killed in one encounter.
12 Next to him was Eleazar son of Dodai the Ahohite, one of the three mighty men. 13 He was with David at Pas Dammim when the Philistines gathered there for battle. At a place where there was a field full of barley, the troops fled from the Philistines. 14 But they took their stand in the middle of the field. They defended it and struck the Philistines down, and the LORD brought about a great victory.
15 Three of the thirty chiefs came down to David to the rock at the cave of Adullam, while a band of Philistines was encamped in the Valley of Rephaim. 16 At that time David was in the stronghold, and the Philistine garrison was at Bethlehem. 17 David longed for water and said, “Oh, that someone would get me a drink of water from the well near the gate of Bethlehem!” 18 So the Three broke through the Philistine lines, drew water from the well near the gate of Bethlehem and carried it back to David. But he refused to drink it; instead, he poured it out before the LORD. 19 “God forbid that I should do this!” he said. “Should I drink the blood of these men who went at the risk of their lives?” Because they risked their lives to bring it back, David would not drink it.
Such were the exploits of the three mighty men.
20 Abishai the brother of Joab was chief of the Three. He raised his spear against three hundred men, whom he killed, and so he became as famous as the Three. 21 He was doubly honored above the Three and became their commander, even though he was not included among them.
22 Benaiah son of Jehoiada was a valiant fighter from Kabzeel, who performed great exploits. He struck down two of Moab’s best men. He also went down into a pit on a snowy day and killed a lion. 23 And he struck down an Egyptian who was seven and a half feet tall. Although the Egyptian had a spear like a weaver’s rod in his hand, Benaiah went against him with a club. He snatched the spear from the Egyptian’s hand and killed him with his own spear. 24 Such were the exploits of Benaiah son of Jehoiada; he too was as famous as the three mighty men. 25 He was held in greater honor than any of the Thirty, but he was not included among the Three. And David put him in charge of his bodyguard.
    26 The mighty men were:
    Asahel the brother of Joab, Elhanan son of Dodo from Bethlehem,
    27 Shammoth the Harorite,
    Helez the Pelonite,
    28 Ira son of Ikkesh from Tekoa,
    Abiezer from Anathoth,
    29 Sibbecai the Hushathite,
    Ilai the Ahohite,
    30 Maharai the Netophathite,
    Heled son of Baanah the Netophathite,
    31 Ithai son of Ribai from Gibeah in Benjamin,
    Benaiah the Pirathonite,
    32 Hurai from the ravines of Gaash,
    Abiel the Arbathite,
    33 Azmaveth the Baharumite,
    Eliahba the Shaalbonite,
    34 the sons of Hashem the Gizonite,
    Jonathan son of Shagee the Hararite,
    35 Ahiam son of Sacar the Hararite,
    Eliphal son of Ur,
    36 Hepher the Mekerathite,
    Ahijah the Pelonite,
    37 Hezro the Carmelite,
    Naarai son of Ezbai,
    38 Joel the brother of Nathan,
    Mibhar son of Hagri,
    39 Zelek the Ammonite,
    Naharai the Berothite, the armor-bearer of Joab son of Zeruiah,
    40 Ira the Ithrite,
    Gareb the Ithrite,
    41 Uriah the Hittite,
    Zabad son of Ahlai,
    42 Adina son of Shiza the Reubenite,
    who was chief of the Reubenites, and the thirty with him,
    43 Hanan son of Maacah,
    Joshaphat the Mithnite,
    44 Uzzia the Ashterathite,
    Shama and Jeiel the sons of Hotham the Aroerite,
    45 Jediael son of Shimri,
    his brother Joha the Tizite,
    46 Eliel the Mahavite,
    Jeribai and Joshaviah the sons of Elnaam,
    Ithmah the Moabite,
    47 Eliel, Obed and Jaasiel the Mezobaite.

11:10 The “all Israel” theme is taken up again. Already at Hebron the warriors joined with all Israel to support David (cf. 11:1, 3; 12:23). They were the “chiefs of David’s mighty men” and gave David strength (ḥzq). This list of David’s mighty men is based on 2 Sam 23:8–39 although details contain some differences. More important for us is that David had significant support.
11:11 The first verse covering this list raises a number of questions. The name “Jashobeam” is a variant of “Josheb-Basshebeth,” in 2 Sam 23:8, and both may be corruptions of an original “Ishbaal” (found in the LXX), sometimes changed to “Ishbosheth.” He is described as “chief of the thirty” in the MT and some versions. The NIV translates “officers” (haššālîšîm) because the Hebrew word is so translated in other contexts and is like a similar word that denotes a military official in some Old Testament texts. Jashobeam is said to have brandished his spear against three hundred men whom he killed in one encounter. The numeral “hundred” may denote a military group rather than a number.
11:12–14 Eleazar, son of Dodai the Ahohite, was another of the three mighty men who stood with David at Pas Dammim at a barley field. The troops of Israel fled before the Philistines, but David and Eleazar took their stand in the midst of the field and achieved a great victory.
A third mighty man, Shammah, son of Agee the Hararite, is mentioned in 2 Sam 23:11–12 but omitted in Chronicles. The story of Eleazar is like the story of Shammah.
11:15–19 This moving little pericope portrays the bravery of three of the thirty chiefs who came to David at the cave of Adullam when the Philistines were spread out in the valley of Rephaim. It is tempting to identify these three with the three warriors of vv. 13–14 though this is not specifically stated. The story shows the love of David’s men for their leader and their willingness to take risks to satisfy his desire. But David himself is shown to have such gratitude to these warriors that he refused to drink the water they brought to him from Bethlehem at such a risk to their lives. He poured it out as a libation to Yahweh, who alone was worthy of such a sacrifice.
11:20–21 Two additional heroes are given here, Abishai and Benaiah (cf. 2 Sam 23:18–23). Abishai, the brother of Joab, is described here as “chief of the Three” (the Syriac text has thirty). But there is considerable uncertainty about the correct text. Most commentators make Abishai and Benaiah leaders among the thirty but perhaps not among the three (v. 21). Abishai was “doubly honored above the Three and became their commander, even though he was not included among them.”
Abishai might have belonged to and been the leader of another “three.” Some have suggested that the three heroes of vv. 15–19 may be intended. L. C. Allen proposes: “Of the three he was more honored than the other two. Therefore he became their captain.”
11:22 Benaiah also performed great exploits, striking down two of Moab’s best warriors and killing a lion on a snowy day.
11:23 Two of the details about the Egyptian, “seven and a half feet tall” and “like a weaver’s rod,” are lacking in 2 Sam 17:4–7. The Egyptian had a huge spear like a weaver’s rod in his hand, but Benaiah disarmed him and killed him, huge man that he was.
11:24–25 Although Benaiah was “as famous as the three mighty men” and greater in honor than any of the thirty, he was not included among the three. David appointed him over his bodyguard.
11:26–41a A list of mighty men begins with v. 26 and names thirty-one individuals. Naturally some names and spellings have variations. The Chronicles list contains thirty-one names; and the Samuel list, thirty. Most of the thirty came from the Judah-Simeon and Old Dan areas, two came from Mount Ephraim, one came from the Jordan Valley, and three were from Transjordan. The bulk of these evidently were strong leaders from David’s own area, and others were carefully selected from other areas.
11:41b–47 This seems to be a supplementary list because the names do not appear in the list in 2 Samuel. Of some interest is that several of these sixteen extra heroes came from Transjordan, for example, a Reubenite (v. 42) and a Moabite (v. 46). An addition like this would serve to magnify the standing of David. The source of this material is not known.


(4) David’s Early Supporters (12:1–22)

1 These were the men who came to David at Ziklag, while he was banished from the presence of Saul son of Kish (they were among the warriors who helped him in battle; 2 they were armed with bows and were able to shoot arrows or to sling stones right-handed or left-handed; they were kinsmen of Saul from the tribe of Benjamin):
    3 Ahiezer their chief and Joash the sons of Shemaah the Gibeathite; Jeziel and Pelet the sons of Azmaveth; Beracah, Jehu the Anathothite,4 and Ishmaiah the Gibeonite, a mighty man among the Thirty, who was a leader of the Thirty; Jeremiah, Jahaziel, Johanan, Jozabad the Gederathite, 5 Eluzai, Jerimoth, Bealiah, Shemariah and Shephatiah the Haruphite; 6 Elkanah, Isshiah, Azarel, Joezer and Jashobeam the Korahites; 7 and Joelah and Zebadiah the sons of Jeroham from Gedor.
8 Some Gadites defected to David at his stronghold in the desert. They were brave warriors, ready for battle and able to handle the shield and spear. Their faces were the faces of lions, and they were as swift as gazelles in the mountains.
9 Ezer was the chief, Obadiah the second in command, Eliab the third,
10 Mishmannah the fourth, Jeremiah the fifth,
11 Attai the sixth, Eliel the seventh,
12 Johanan the eighth, Elzabad the ninth,
13 Jeremiah the tenth and Macbannai the eleventh.
    14 These Gadites were army commanders; the least was a match for a hundred, and the greatest for a thousand.15 It was they who crossed the Jordan in the first month when it was overflowing all its banks, and they put to flight everyone living in the valleys, to the east and to the west.
16 Other Benjamites and some men from Judah also came to David in his stronghold. 17 David went out to meet them and said to them, “If you have come to me in peace, to help me, I am ready to have you unite with me. But if you have come to betray me to my enemies when my hands are free from violence, may the God of our fathers see it and judge you.”
    18 Then the Spirit came upon Amasai, chief of the Thirty, and he said:
    “We are yours, O David!
    We are with you, O son of Jesse!
    Success, success to you,
    and success to those who help you, for your God will help you.”
    So David received them and made them leaders of his raiding bands.
    19 Some of the men of Manasseh defected to David when he went with the Philistines to fight against Saul. (He and his men did not help the Philistines because, after consultation, their rulers sent him away. They said, “It will cost us our heads if he deserts to his master Saul.”) 20 When David went to Ziklag, these were the men of Manasseh who defected to him: Adnah, Jozabad, Jediael, Michael, Jozabad, Elihu and Zillethai, leaders of units of a thousand in Manasseh. 21 They helped David against raiding bands, for all of them were brave warriors, and they were commanders in his army. 22 Day after day men came to help David, until he had a great army, like the army of God.

Chapter 12 falls into two parts: 12:1–22 and 12:23–40. The chapter shows in four brief sections how support grew for David until he had “a great and mighty army” (v. 22; cf. vv. 1, 8, 16, 19, 22). A poem spoken by Amasai, chief of the Thirty, stresses the fact and adds a prayer for success. The Chronicler’s well-known chiastic structure is again pressed into use, linking back to 11:10. It is built around three geographical points—Hebron, Ziklag, and the stronghold.

    A      Hebron 11:10
      B      Ziklag 12:1
         C      The Stronghold 12:8
         C´      The Stronghold 12:16
      B´      Ziklag 12:20
    A´      Hebron 12:23

Some of David’s support was displayed when men “came to him.” Other support resulted from desertions. These men came from many places, indeed from “all Israel.” This gives further confirmation of the legitimacy of David’s kingship and Samuel’s prophetic word (11:1–3).
We probably should not be looking for any chronological presentation here but rather the development of a theme, namely, that the men of Israel came as part of a concerted movement to stand with David to ensure that Saul’s kingdom was handed over to him according to the plan and purpose of God (v. 23).
12:1–2 Ziklag was given to David by Achish, king of Gath, when David was fleeing from Saul (1 Sam 27:6). From this center David made raids against various groups. David’s allies were armed with bows and arrows and sling stones, an interesting comment on some of the arms carried by Israel’s warriors in the tenth century B.C. David’s warriors were ambidextrous, a useful skill in small armies. Remarkably, they were from Saul’s tribe of Benjamin, and their leaders were from Gibeah, Saul’s hometown (v. 3, “Gibeathite”). Whether they were politically discerning (sensing that Saul’s power was in decline), spiritually discerning (recognizing the godliness of David over against Saul), or both, their defection to David was proof that loyalty to the rightful ruler of Israel can overcome tribal jealousies. David was truly a king for all Israel.
12:3–7 Some of the place names mentioned here are readily identifiable—Gibeah, Azmaveth, Anathoth (Ras el-Karrubeh), about three miles northeast of Jerusalem, home of Jeremiah in later days, Gibeon (el-Jib), Gederah (probably Jedireh, near Gibeon). All these fell in the area of Benjamin.
12:8–13 Here is a second group that joined David, this time defectors from Gad. Before fleeing to the Philistines with Ziklag as his center, David hid from Saul in his stronghold in the wilderness. Here brave warriors, ready for battle and able to handle a shield and spear (additional weapons to those in v. 2), joined him. The comparison of these brave warriors with animals, lions and gazelles, makes use of a well-known metaphor in the Hebrew Bible. Seven Gadites, army commanders, are listed in the manner of 2:13–15; 3:1–3.
12:14 The Hebrew text here is staccato and cryptic and has been variously translated. It probably is best translated “the least of them a match for a hundred, the greatest a match for a thousand” (NEB; cf. Lev 26:8; Deut 32:30; Isa 30:17).
12:15 The first month of the year was springtime, when the melting snows from Mount Hermon brought floods to the Jordan (cf. Josh 3:13).
The latter part of this verse poses some translation problems. The translation of J. M. Myers captures the sense: “The Jordan overflowed all its banks and made impassible all the lowlands to the east and to the west.”
12:16–17 Others from Benjamin and Judah, evidently a group demanding special mention, joined David at the stronghold. The identity of the stronghold (fortress) is not known. The term “stronghold” is used in vv. 8, 16. Some commentators have proposed Engedi as the location (cf. 1 Sam 24:1). David was at first cautious about accepting this group and asked whether they had come in peace to help him or whether they had come to betray him to his enemies. He was eager to make an alliance with them but had been betrayed on three previous occasions—by Doeg the Edomite (1 Sam 21–22), by the people of Keilah (1 Sam 23), and by the Ziphites (1 Sam 26). So David responded with an oath, “May the God of our fathers see it and judge you” (1 Chr 12:17).
12:18 Amasai’s reply was inspired by the Spirit, as indicated by the expression found several times in the Old Testament, literally, “The Spirit clothed himself with Amasai” (cf. Judg 6:34; 2 Chr 24:20). Amasai may have been the same as Absalom’s general Amasa. David was satisfied when he heard this powerful affirmation of loyalty to himself and a clear statement of their acknowledgment that David was God’s man as much as Abraham had been (cf. Gen 12:3). Again and again Israel reaffirmed the legitimacy of David’s assumption of the crown. The best warriors came to David, Saul’s own fellow Benjamites acknowledged him (1 Chr 12:1–7), and now a soldier-prophet declared he was God’s anointed over the nation. The word translated “success” is šālôm, often rendered “peace” but more broadly denoting the well-being, wholeness, and fullness of life coming to those who know God. It also included a prayer and assurance that David would experience rest from his enemies (Deut 12:10; 2 Sam 7:1; 1 Chr 17:1).
12:19–22 Seven defectors from Manasseh are listed. These men must have joined David just before the battle of Mount Gilboa, where Saul was killed. David was sent away by the Philistines because they mistrusted him, though Achish did not (cf. 1 Sam 29). Apparently David accompanied the Philistines part of the way, at least as far as Aphek (1 Sam 29:1), which lay near Manasseh. The term “thousand” (1 Chr 12:20; cf. note at 5:18) probably denotes a tribal subdivision. These men assisted David in his raids against the Amalekites who attacked Ziklag during David’s absence (1 Sam 30).


(5) David’s Coronation at Hebron (12:23–40)

23 These are the numbers of the men armed for battle who came to David at Hebron to turn Saul’s kingdom over to him, as the LORD had said:
24 men of Judah, carrying shield and spear—6,800 armed for battle;
25 men of Simeon, warriors ready for battle—7,100;
    26 men of Levi—4,600, 27 including Jehoiada, leader of the family of Aaron, with 3,700 men, 28 and Zadok, a brave young warrior, with 22 officers from his family;
29 men of Benjamin, Saul’s kinsmen—3,000, most of whom had remained loyal to Saul’s house until then;
30 men of Ephraim, brave warriors, famous in their own clans—20,800;
31 men of half the tribe of Manasseh, designated by name to come and make David king—18,000;
    32 men of Issachar, who understood the times and knew what Israel should do—200 chiefs, with all their relatives under their command;
33 men of Zebulun, experienced soldiers prepared for battle with every type of weapon, to help David with undivided loyalty—50,000;
34 men of Naphtali—1,000 officers, together with 37,000 men carrying shields and spears;
35 men of Dan, ready for battle—28,600;
36 men of Asher, experienced soldiers prepared for battle—40,000;
    37 and from east of the Jordan, men of Reuben, Gad and the half-tribe of Manasseh, armed with every type of weapon—120,000.
38 All these were fighting men who volunteered to serve in the ranks. They came to Hebron fully determined to make David king over all Israel. All the rest of the Israelites were also of one mind to make David king. 39 The men spent three days there with David, eating and drinking, for their families had supplied provisions for them. 40 Also, their neighbors from as far away as Issachar, Zebulun and Naphtali came bringing food on donkeys, camels, mules and oxen. There were plentiful supplies of flour, fig cakes, raisin cakes, wine, oil, cattle and sheep, for there was joy in Israel.

12:23–25 A further list of units supporting David’s kingship is provided here. Men came, armed for battle, to hand over Saul’s kingdom to David in the plan and purpose of God.
A general comment about the large numbers seems to be called for. The word translated as meaning thousand may, in some circumstances, have indicated a military unit of some kind (see 12:19–22). Thus v. 24 could be translated, “The men of Judah, carrying shield and spear numbered six units with eight hundred armed men.”
Alternatively, each tribal clan may have been intended to provide a contingent of a thousand men. The word indicating thousand can be retained in translation but interpreted loosely. Another proposal is to vocalize ʾelep, “thousand,” to read ʾallûp, “chief” or “military officer” (see note on 7:1–5). In that case Judah would have provided eight hundred armed troops under six leaders. In the absence of clear definition our view must remain uncertain.
Appraisal of the list will show that warriors came to David from “all Israel.” They were battle ready, “armed with every type of weapon, fighting men who volunteered to serve in the ranks.”
12:26–30 A contingent of Levites was included. This made up thirteen tribes. Normally Levites were not included in the armies of Israel. Only here in vv. 27–28 are individuals named.
The Zadok of v. 28 sometimes has been identified with the one who became priest under Solomon when Abiathar was banished. He was a young man of standing, a brave young warrior who was accompanied by twenty-two commanders. Not all commentators accept this identification, although his association with Jehoiada, of Aaron’s family, may lend support to this view.
12:32 The intention of this verse seems to be that the men of Issachar had some skill in discerning the meaning of current political events, not an astrological skill (as in Esth 1:13) but resulting from shrewd observation.
12:33–40 When the time was up, the volunteers came to Hebron to make David king over “all Israel.” But “the rest of Israel” was of one mind with the warriors to make David king. They held a large celebratory banquet with large contributions of food from the northern tribes of Issachar, Zebulun, and Naphtali. It is easy to see in these days of “eating and drinking” a covenant meal. On such occasions joy was a regular accompaniment of the celebrations. The Chronicler noticed this on other occasions (1 Chr 29:22; 2 Chr 7:8–10; 30:21–26).
Now that David was established as king over all Israel, the Chronicler could take up his second great concern, the restoration of the ark from its exile in readiness for its housing in the temple, which at this stage still remained to be built.


2. The Ark Brought to Jerusalem (13:1–16:43)

(1) The Transfer of the Ark to Jerusalem: First Attempt (13:1–14)

1 David conferred with each of his officers, the commanders of thousands and commanders of hundreds. 2 He then said to the whole assembly of Israel, “If it seems good to you and if it is the will of the LORD our God, let us send word far and wide to the rest of our brothers throughout the territories of Israel, and also to the priests and Levites who are with them in their towns and pasturelands, to come and join us. 3 Let us bring the ark of our God back to us, for we did not inquire of it during the reign of Saul.” 4 The whole assembly agreed to do this, because it seemed right to all the people.
5 So David assembled all the Israelites, from the Shihor River in Egypt to Lebo Hamath, to bring the ark of God from Kiriath Jearim. 6 David and all the Israelites with him went to Baalah of Judah (Kiriath Jearim) to bring up from there the ark of God the LORD, who is enthroned between the cherubim—the ark that is called by the Name.
7 They moved the ark of God from Abinadab’s house on a new cart, with Uzzah and Ahio guiding it. 8 David and all the Israelites were celebrating with all their might before God, with songs and with harps, lyres, tambourines, cymbals and trumpets.
9 When they came to the threshing floor of Kidon, Uzzah reached out his hand to steady the ark, because the oxen stumbled. 10 The LORD’S anger burned against Uzzah, and he struck him down because he had put his hand on the ark. So he died there before God.
11 Then David was angry because the LORD’S wrath had broken out against Uzzah, and to this day that place is called Perez Uzzah.
12 David was afraid of God that day and asked, “How can I ever bring the ark of God to me?” 13 He did not take the ark to be with him in the City of David. Instead, he took it aside to the house of Obed-Edom the Gittite. 14 The ark of God remained with the family of Obed-Edom in his house for three months, and the LORD blessed his household and everything he had.

The ark was brought to Jerusalem in two stages. It had been taken by the Philistines in the encounter at Ebenezer (1 Sam 5) and removed to their territory. But it caused so much embarrassment there that they decided to send it back to the land of Judah with a guilt offering (1 Sam 6:1–9). It was brought to Beth-Shemesh, where prying eyes “looked into the ark” and the offenders were stricken down (1 Sam 6:10–20). Messengers were sent to Kiriath Jearim requesting its removal (1 Sam 6:21–7:1). It was taken to the house of Abinadab and there remained until David removed it.
The main part of the story comes from 2 Sam 6:2–11. Only here in 1 Chr 13:1–5, however, do we find details of David’s call to the people of Israel to bring back the ark. It was to prove a difficult task.
13:1 The Chronicler was at pains to point out that the enterprise was a joint effort of all Israel. David consulted with each of his leaders, the commanders of the thousands and the commanders of the hundreds.
13:2–3 The comprehensive nature of the call to the “whole assembly” of Israel is here spelled out. Word was to be sent far and wide to the rest of the people throughout the territories of Israel, to the priests, the Levites, in the towns and in the pasturelands to join together in a great enterprise to bring back the ark. Neglect of the ark in the days of Saul was at least in part the reason for the defeat of Israel in Saul’s day. The people had failed to “inquire” of the Lord as they should have. The verb “inquire” has strong overtones of that sincere worship of and commitment to Yahweh that was expected of Israel.
13:4 The “whole assembly” agreed to the proposal. It seemed right to “all the people.”
13:5 “All the Israelites” (mentioned three times in vv. 5–8) throughout the land from the Shihor River in Egypt to Lebo-Hamath (the entrance of Hamath), that is, in the full extent of the land of Israel from Beersheba to Dan (cf. 1 Chr 21:2), assembled to bring the ark of God from Kiriath Jearim, the present-day Tell el-Azhar, about eight miles west of Jerusalem. It was one of four Gibeonite towns located on the Judah-Benjamin border (Josh 18:15). In Josh 18:14 it is called Kiriath-baal (city of Baal), in Josh 15:9 it is called Baalah, and here in 1 Chr 13:6 it is called Baalah of Judah (cf. 2 Sam 6:2, Baal-Judah). It was later the home of Uriah, the prophet of Jeremiah’s day (Jer 26:20) and figured in postexilic history (Neh 7:29).
13:6 The ark is here described as “the ark of God, the LORD, who is enthroned between the Cherubim.” The ark was a central feature of Israel’s temple worship because it represented the presence of God among his people (cf. Exod 25:22). It was both the throne of God and a receptacle for the law. In 1 Chr 28:2 it is referred to as “the footstool of God.”
13:7–8 Uzzah and Ahio moved the ark from Abinadab’s house on a new cart while David and “all” celebrated before God with songs and music. “All the Israelites” stresses again the involvement of all God’s people in this rescue. The term “Israel” is more theological than political. While the expression “before the LORD [Yahweh]” is frequently found elsewhere, the terms “LORD [Yahweh]” and “God [Elohim]” are synonymous.
13:9–10 At the threshing floor of Kidon the oxen drawing the cart on which the ark rested stumbled and evidently rocked the ark. Uzzah reached out his hand to steady it. This was a serious ritual offense since only authorized persons, the Levites, were to carry the tabernacle and all its furnishings. The wrath of the Lord flared forth against Uzzah, and he died.
13:11 David’s response to this action of the Lord was anger because the Lord’s wrath had broken out against Uzzah (the verb translated “had broken out” also is found in 14:11; 15:13). The place was called Perez Uzzah (the rending asunder of Uzzah, or outbreak against Uzzah).
13:12 David was afraid of God and despaired of restoring the ark to the City of David. He needed to learn that there was a proper way to carry out God’s will. When David and the people went to get the ark, the excitement of the moment and the sense that they were doing God’s will gave the event a festive atmosphere. This very excitement gave them a sense of familiarity with the things of God that became unhealthy, and they neglected to give the ark the respect God demanded. David, in his fear, came back to sobriety about this issue. The whole incident reminds us that even our enthusiasm for God can cause us to forget the holiness of God and the need to fear him. Doing what we believe to be God’s will in a way that violates God’s Word is wrong and displeases God.
13:13–14 The ark was lodged in the home of Obed-Edom, the Gittite (man of Gath), for three months. Blessing came to Obed-Edom’s house as a result. While a question may be raised about the propriety of lodging the ark with such a man, it is to be noted that in 15:18, 21 there is mention of an Obed-Edom, who was a Levite and a gatekeeper.


(2) David’s House and Family (14:1–17)

1 Now Hiram king of Tyre sent messengers to David, along with cedar logs, stonemasons and carpenters to build a palace for him. 2 And David knew that the LORD had established him as king over Israel and that his kingdom had been highly exalted for the sake of his people Israel.
3 In Jerusalem David took more wives and became the father of more sons and daughters. 4 These are the names of the children born to him there: Shammua, Shobab, Nathan, Solomon, 5 Ibhar, Elishua, Elpelet, 6 Nogah, Nepheg, Japhia, 7 Elishama, Beeliada and Eliphelet.
8 When the Philistines heard that David had been anointed king over all Israel, they went up in full force to search for him, but David heard about it and went out to meet them. 9 Now the Philistines had come and raided the Valley of Rephaim; 10 so David inquired of God: “Shall I go and attack the Philistines? Will you hand them over to me?”
The LORD answered him, “Go, I will hand them over to you.”
11 So David and his men went up to Baal Perazim, and there he defeated them. He said, “As waters break out, God has broken out against my enemies by my hand.” So that place was called Baal Perazim. 12 The Philistines had abandoned their gods there, and David gave orders to burn them in the fire.
13 Once more the Philistines raided the valley; 14 so David inquired of God again, and God answered him, “Do not go straight up, but circle around them and attack them in front of the balsam trees. 15 As soon as you hear the sound of marching in the tops of the balsam trees, move out to battle, because that will mean God has gone out in front of you to strike the Philistine army.” 16 So David did as God commanded him, and they struck down the Philistine army, all the way from Gibeon to Gezer.
17 So David’s fame spread throughout every land, and the LORD made all the nations fear him.

At first sight it might seem that after David’s failure to bring back the ark to Jerusalem he should have been rebuked. Rather, he received blessing in his dealings with Hiram, ruler of Tyre, his defeat of the Philistines, his spreading fame, and his growing family, all sure signs of blessing. These events are not necessarily in chronological order, but the Chronicler used them to make some observations about David that are basically theological. He was a savior figure for Israel in the Chronicler’s view. He would yet restore the ark to the City of David, and, despite the abortive attempt to bring back the ark, he still had God’s approval as the various incidents gathered together here show. The material is drawn from 2 Sam 5:11–25 but was used for the Chronicler’s own purpose. The theme of divine blessing is to be seen throughout but especially at the beginning and end of the chapter in vv. 2, 17.
The Chronicler presents a theological contrast between David and Saul. David, unlike Saul, was concerned for the ark (13:3). By incorporating indications of David’s prosperity and success against the Philistines, the Chronicler demonstrated God’s blessing on his servant for his faithfulness. By contrast, Saul’s defeat because of his unfaithfulness (chap. 10) stresses the point. It is a theme that runs throughout Chronicles. The reigns of faithful kings are marked by divine blessing.
14:1 Hiram’s delegation brought assistance to David. He gave David recognition, respect, and gifts—each a sign of God’s blessing. The embassy of Hiram was accompanied by cedar logs, stone masons, and carpenters to assist in the building of a palace for David. The word used for “palace” (bayit, the normal word for “house”) is also used for “temple,” but here it must refer to palace. The time to build the temple had not yet arrived. There is a subtle play on words here because the term can mean “palace,” “dynasty,” and “temple.” The theme will be expounded again in chap. 17 with the prophecy of Nathan.
14:2 The Chronicler makes a slight change in the text of 2 Sam 5:12 in order to give more prominence to the exaltation of David’s kingdom “for the sake of his people Israel.” David was aware that Yahweh had established him as king over Israel and that he had been “highly exalted for the sake of his people Israel.” The Chronicler seems here to be saying that not only David but the whole of the people were enjoying God’s favor.
14:3–7 Further evidence of God’s blessing on David was his large family born in Jerusalem, both sons and daughters. Among his sons was Solomon, through whom David’s dynasty would be established. He was born during or shortly after the Ammonite campaign (2 Sam 12:24). The list of thirteen sons follows 3:5–8 but deviates from 2 Sam 5:14–16, primarily in the addition of two sons, Elpelet and Nogah.
14:8–11 David had two encounters with the Philistines and was successful in both (vv. 8–12 and vv. 13–16). The first attack came after the Philistines learned that David had been anointed king over “all Israel,” a favorite expression of the Chronicler as we have noted several times. The place they struck was in the valley of Rephaim, southwest of Jerusalem on the old boundary between Judah and Benjamin (Josh 15:8). David went to meet them, but he first “inquired” (šāʾal) of God and gained the assurance that God would hand them over to him (v. 10). A further contrast with Saul appears here. Saul “inquired” (šāʾal) of a medium at Endor. The encounter took place at Baal-Perazim, where God “broke out” against David’s enemies (v. 11). The incident gave its name to the place.
14:12 The gods (idols) of the Philistines were taken into battle but failed them in the encounter, and the Philistines abandoned them. They were not taken as booty but were burned on David’s orders (cf. Deut 7:5; 12:3).
14:13–16 There was a second Philistine encounter in which David again was victorious. The Philistines raided the valley, defined in 2 Sam 5:22 as “the Valley of Rephaim.” David acted appropriately again and “inquired” (same verb as in v. 10) of God, who assured him of success although the plan of attack was different. God assured David of victory. He was to circle round and listen for the sound of marching in the tops of the balsam trees. That would indicate that God had gone out in front of David to strike the Philistine army. Other examples of divine intervention on behalf of his people occur in later narratives in Chronicles. It was a sign that the holy war was being discharged. David obeyed and struck down the Philistines all the way from Gibeon to Gezer. David’s fame spread abroad, and the fear he engendered reached into every land. Under God’s blessing and in keeping with David’s faithfulness, David became famous.


(3) The Successful Transfer of the Ark to Jerusalem (15:1–16:6)

1 After David had constructed buildings for himself in the City of David, he prepared a place for the ark of God and pitched a tent for it. 2 Then David said, “No one but the Levites may carry the ark of God, because the LORD chose them to carry the ark of the LORD and to minister before him forever.”
3 David assembled all Israel in Jerusalem to bring up the ark of the LORD to the place he had prepared for it. 4 He called together the descendants of Aaron and the Levites:
    5 From the descendants of Kohath,
    Uriel the leader and 120 relatives;
    6 from the descendants of Merari,
    Asaiah the leader and 220 relatives;
    7 from the descendants of Gershon,
    Joel the leader and 130 relatives;
    8 from the descendants of Elizaphan,
    Shemaiah the leader and 200 relatives;
    9 from the descendants of Hebron,
    Eliel the leader and 80 relatives;
    10 from the descendants of Uzziel,
    Amminadab the leader and 112 relatives.
    11 Then David summoned Zadok and Abiathar the priests, and Uriel, Asaiah, Joel, Shemaiah, Eliel and Amminadab the Levites. 12 He said to them, “You are the heads of the Levitical families; you and your fellow Levites are to consecrate yourselves and bring up the ark of the LORD, the God of Israel, to the place I have prepared for it. 13 It was because you, the Levites, did not bring it up the first time that the LORD our God broke out in anger against us. We did not inquire of him about how to do it in the prescribed way.” 14 So the priests and Levites consecrated themselves in order to bring up the ark of the LORD, the God of Israel. 15 And the Levites carried the ark of God with the poles on their shoulders, as Moses had commanded in accordance with the word of the LORD.
16 David told the leaders of the Levites to appoint their brothers as singers to sing joyful songs, accompanied by musical instruments: lyres, harps and cymbals.
17 So the Levites appointed Heman son of Joel; from his brothers, Asaph son of Berekiah; and from their brothers the Merarites, Ethan son of Kushaiah; 18 and with them their brothers next in rank: Zechariah, Jaaziel, Shemiramoth, Jehiel, Unni, Eliab, Benaiah, Maaseiah, Mattithiah, Eliphelehu, Mikneiah, Obed-Edom and Jeiel, the gatekeepers.
19 The musicians Heman, Asaph and Ethan were to sound the bronze cymbals; 20 Zechariah, Aziel, Shemiramoth, Jehiel, Unni, Eliab, Maaseiah and Benaiah were to play the lyres according to alamoth, 21 and Mattithiah, Eliphelehu, Mikneiah, Obed-Edom, Jeiel and Azaziah were to play the harps, directing according to sheminith. 22 Kenaniah the head Levite was in charge of the singing; that was his responsibility because he was skillful at it.
23 Berekiah and Elkanah were to be doorkeepers for the ark. 24 Shebaniah, Joshaphat, Nethanel, Amasai, Zechariah, Benaiah and Eliezer the priests were to blow trumpets before the ark of God. Obed-Edom and Jehiah were also to be doorkeepers for the ark.
25 So David and the elders of Israel and the commanders of units of a thousand went to bring up the ark of the covenant of the LORD from the house of Obed-Edom, with rejoicing. 26 Because God had helped the Levites who were carrying the ark of the covenant of the LORD, seven bulls and seven rams were sacrificed. 27 Now David was clothed in a robe of fine linen, as were all the Levites who were carrying the ark, and as were the singers, and Kenaniah, who was in charge of the singing of the choirs. David also wore a linen ephod. 28 So all Israel brought up the ark of the covenant of the LORD with shouts, with the sounding of rams’ horns and trumpets, and of cymbals, and the playing of lyres and harps.
29 As the ark of the covenant of the LORD was entering the City of David, Michal daughter of Saul watched from a window. And when she saw King David dancing and celebrating, she despised him in her heart.
1 They brought the ark of God and set it inside the tent that David had pitched for it, and they presented burnt offerings and fellowship offerings before God. 2 After David had finished sacrificing the burnt offerings and fellowship offerings, he blessed the people in the name of the LORD. 3 Then he gave a loaf of bread, a cake of dates and a cake of raisins to each Israelite man and woman.
4 He appointed some of the Levites to minister before the ark of the LORD, to make petition, to give thanks, and to praise the LORD, the God of Israel: 5 Asaph was the chief, Zechariah second, then Jeiel, Shemiramoth, Jehiel, Mattithiah, Eliab, Benaiah, Obed-Edom and Jeiel. They were to play the lyres and harps, Asaph was to sound the cymbals, 6 and Benaiah and Jahaziel the priests were to blow the trumpets regularly before the ark of the covenant of God.

The setback at Perez-uzzah delayed the return of the ark to Jerusalem. The account is based on 2 Sam 6:12–20. The Chronicler, however, gives the story a different perspective in several respects. David’s intention always was to bring the ark back to Jerusalem despite delays. He needed to prepare a home for the ark (15:1) and also to order and prepare the Levites for their task. This could not be hurried. It was not simply that David sought blessings similar to those enjoyed by Obed-Edom, in whose home the ark had rested. David had a deeper purpose. The ark was to be brought to Jerusalem irrespective of any hope for his own personal blessing.
Further, the Chronicler stresses the work of the Levites. They were to have special duties after the ark had found a resting place, namely, to take responsibility for the music of Israel’s worship (6:31–32). The Chronicler shows that David had initiated the plans that Solomon brought to fruition. The bearers of the ark became the temple singers in a later day (16:4–40). But already in David’s day the plans had been laid (15:11–22). The Chronicler stressed certain elements in which David was involved: the preparation of a place for the ark to rest, the appointment of singers and musical instruments, and the preparation of the vestments to be worn by the Levites.
The most arresting feature of this narrative is not obvious to the modern reader. The Chronicler was devoting great time and attention to describing incidents surrounding the ark and the need to treat it as a holy object even though by the time of the Chronicler it had already ceased to exist. In other words, the original readers of this book had no more opportunity to worship God before the ark than we do. Why would the Chronicler stress the joy and holiness associated with it if his readers would never have opportunity to emulate David’s obedience?
The answer must be that for the Chronicler it was not the object itself but what the object represented that mattered. The ark represented two great truths. First, God was with them and would go with them wherever they went. The ark traveled with the exodus generation, was with Joshua’s generation as they entered Canaan, and had been in various locations now in their land. Second, the ark represented the holiness of God. It contained the tablets of the Ten Commandments—the essence of the law—and they had seen for themselves that God’s ark was not to be trifled with (13:10). These two truths, that God is with us and that God is holy, are what really mattered to the Chronicler. We need to keep this in mind lest we think of the Chronicler simply as one full of nostalgia for the good old days. Finally, the chapter teaches God’s compassionate forgiveness in allowing Israel a second chance. Israel’s initial failure was not final and God’s judgment was not just positive but instructive.
We can discern the steps taken to restore the ark to Jerusalem. The narrative becomes the occasion for spelling out the organization and installation of the Levitical families and in particular the temple musicians (15:1–24). The arrival of the ark in Jerusalem (15:25–16:3) was celebrated by the gathering of “all Israel” and the singing of a lengthy hymn by the Asaphites (16:4–36), after which the priests and Levites were assigned their various duties (16:37–42). Once this was complete, the scene was set for a new stage in the story of the ark and the history of King David and Israel.
15:1–3 These verses are unique to the Chronicler. Important aspects of the preparations for bringing the ark to Jerusalem were: (1) the ark and its tent, (2) the role of the Levites, and (3) the reassembling of “all Israel.”
The buildings David erected for himself were a palace and other yet-unnamed structures. Details of these were not regarded as particularly important. The focus is on the place he had prepared for the ark of God and the tent he had pitched for it although details about the nature of this tent are not given (cf. 2 Sam 6:17). This must have been a new construction. The old Mosaic tabernacle was still at Gibeon (16:39; 2 Chr 1:3; cf. 1 Kgs 8:4). The term “place” often carries overtones of a holy place.
Great care had to be taken that the proper personnel, namely, the Levites, should carry the ark. Their failure to do this at the first attempt at its removal to Jerusalem was the reason for the failure of that attempt. The law of Deut 10:8 was clear in this respect (Num 4:1–18). Transport by ox-cart was fraught with danger. The Chronicler, however, here stressed the significance of the Levites in temple worship (cf. 16:4–7; 2 Chr 5–6).
“All Israel” (v. 3) was assembled in Jerusalem to bring up the ark of the Lord to the place prepared for it. It was a national occasion.
15:4–10 The three Levitical groups—Kohath, Merari, and Gershon, and the numbers of their families—are mentioned along with descendants of three other families—Elizaphan, Hebron, and Uzziel, who must have attained sufficient numbers or prestige to gain independent status. They all derive from Kohath (Exod 6:18, 22). This sixfold division of Levites is otherwise unknown and may represent an updated statement nearer to the time of the Chronicler. The name of Joel (v. 7) is lacking in the list of Gershonites in 6:16–30 but is present at 23:8 and 26:22. However, Hebron and Uzziel (vv. 9–10) are not listed elsewhere as heads of Levitical families though they may have been descendants of Kohath (6:18; Exod 6:22).
The work of the Levites is in focus in this list although priests and Levites are associated in vv. 11, 14. Not until 16:39–40 is the distinctive work of the priests taken up as they presented burnt offerings to the Lord on the altar of burnt offerings.
15:11–15 The religious leaders were then summoned—the priests, Zadok and Abiathar, and six Levites. The Levites, who carried the ark, were charged to consecrate themselves before they brought up the ark to the place prepared for it (v. 12). The Chronicler offers an explanation for the failure to bring up the ark earlier, which caused the Lord to break forth in anger against Israel. Ritual propriety and action according to the regulations laid down were always important but particularly to the Chronicler. These things helped to guarantee an appreciation for the sanctity and sovereignty of God.
The priests and Levites alike consecrated themselves for the significant task of bringing up the ark of Yahweh, the God of Israel. The Levites carried the ark with the poles on their shoulders according to the word the Lord delivered through Moses (Exod 25:13–15; Num 7:9). Even in matters of ritual it is important to follow God’s directions.
15:16–24 Having brought up the ark to its place, it was time for the people to break out into joyous celebration with the help of singers and musical instruments. It had been a joyous occasion when David was accepted as king over all Israel (12:39–40). Now with the ark restored, the note of joy is sounded again (15:16, 25). So vv. 16–24 lay stress on the singing of joyful songs accompanied by music. Arrangements were necessarily interim in character until the temple was built. Continuing worship was being enjoyed at the sanctuary in Gibeon (2 Chr 1:3). Priestly personnel were appointed for the sacrificial system to be operated according to the Torah (16:40), and two of the Levitical guilds, those of Heman and Jeduthun, were commissioned to carry out a musical ministry (16:42). Asaph came to be a composer of Psalms (cf. 16:4–5; Pss 73–83).
Three lists of Levitical personnel are in chaps. 15–16: (1) 15:17–18; (2) 15:19–24; (3) 16:5–6, the longest being 15:19–24. It is difficult now to account for the differences. Lists (1) and (2) give some indication of the instruments some individuals used. We cannot now be sure why the Chronicler included parts of three different lists, although no doubt each in its way was authentic. The list of Levites may be divided into three groups according to the instruments they played.
15:16 We can probably see here the practice of family tradition. Certain families were specialists in particular instruments, much as they were in wider life. The leaders of the Levites were to appoint their “brothers” as singers and musicians. That David was an originator of musical guilds and services is well known.
15:17–18 Most of these names are known in other Levitical lists although the question of identity is uncertain. Some occurrences have slight changes; for example, “Kushaiah” (v. 17) appears as “Kishi” in 6:44; and Obed-Edom (v. 18), who appears as a Levitical musician in v. 21 and 16:5, later has a change of status to gatekeeper (26:1–11). This was not necessarily a demotion.
15:19–24 The Levites who provided music are here listed as players of bronze cymbals, lyres, and harps. A number of technical terms used here have been variously understood. The doorkeepers for the ark seem to have been a special group not included in the list in v. 16. Seven priests were to blow trumpets before the ark of God (cf. Num 10:8; 31:6; Neh 12:35, 41).
15:25 David, the elders of Israel, and the commanders of units of a thousand went to bring up the ark of the covenant of the Lord from the house of Obed-Edom. David was not operating alone but in cooperation with other leaders of Israel. The “all Israel” motif is clear, as is the motif of joy.
15:26–27 Samuel had referred to “the bearers of the ark” (2 Sam 6:13, NASB) and to “shouts and the sound of trumpets” (v. 15). Chronicles makes clear that it was the Levites who carried the ark and also refers to the singers, their leader (v. 27), and the wide range of instruments usually associated with the Levites and priests (v. 28). God responded to Israel’s ritual faithfulness by helping the Levites in their duty of carrying the ark. The sacrifices were then an expression of thanks for God’s help.
The question about who offered the sacrifices may be asked. This was normally a priestly act. The fact that David was clothed in “a robe of fine linen” (v. 27), which is also described as a “linen ephod,” as did the Levites who carried the ark, has raised the question of whether David had assumed priestly garments. The wearing of the ephod was restricted to the high priest in the Chronicler’s day (Exod 28:4ff.; Lev 8:7). In the parallel text in 2 Sam 6:14, 20 the reference may be to a loin cloth, which would explain Michal’s rebuke. The occasion was special, and the full temple rituals were yet in the future when the rituals and offices could be regulated.
Probably we should see some priestly function for David here, but not as a pretext for Israelite kings to assume Levitical prerogatives. This was, in the history of Israel, an exceptional but significant event. David functioned as the type for the Messiah as a king who is also a priest.
15:28 “All Israel” thus transported the ark of the covenant of Yahweh with music and shouts of joy.
15:29 The Chronicler’s perspective on Michal is slightly different than that of the longer account in 2 Sam 6:16, 20, 23. There it might appear that Michal’s reaction to David’s behavior was motivated by jealousy and by a misinterpretation of David’s motive. But here it is clear that like her father, Saul, Michal had no appreciation for the things of God.
16:1–3 Following the parallel record in 2 Sam 6:17–19, the Chronicler describes the successful conclusion of the task of restoring the ark. Here again David was involved in the presentation of burnt offerings and fellowship offerings before God. Then he blessed the people in the name of the Lord and presented them with gifts: a loaf of bread, a cake of dates, and a cake of raisins to each. Some translators take the Hebrew of “cake of dates” to mean a “portion” (of meat).
The Levitical ministrations are next set out (16:4–42). Until the temple had been dedicated, the sacrificial aspects of Israel’s worship were confined to the altar at Gibeon (vv. 39–40). In the passage before us the Levites, whom David appointed to minister before the ark of the covenant, performed restricted duties.
16:4 The Levites’ main responsibilities were the musical aspects of worship: to make petitions through psalms of lament, to give thanks in thanksgiving psalms, and to praise the Lord, the God of Israel, in song. Elements of each of these three are to be found in the composite psalm of Asaph and his associates in vv. 8–36.
16:5–6 Only some of those listed in 15:16–22 are listed in these verses. The others evidently were engaged at Gibeon (v. 41).
In a passage concerned with Levites the reference to priests may seem out of place. But since the general context is concerned with music and not with the sacrificial aspects of priestly duties, the priestly task of blowing the trumpets before the ark of the covenant is all that is required. The priest Benaiah was mentioned in 15:24, although his companion, Jaheziel, is not mentioned there.


(4) David’s Psalm of Thanksgiving (16:7–36)

7 That day David first committed to Asaph and his associates this psalm of thanks to the LORD:
    8 Give thanks to the LORD, call on his name;
    make known among the nations what he has done.
    9 Sing to him, sing praise to him;
    tell of all his wonderful acts.
    10 Glory in his holy name;
    let the hearts of those who seek the LORD rejoice.
    11 Look to the LORD and his strength;
    seek his face always.
    12 Remember the wonders he has done,
    his miracles, and the judgments he pronounced,
    13 O descendants of Israel his servant,
    O sons of Jacob, his chosen ones.
    14 He is the LORD our God;
    his judgments are in all the earth.
    15 He remembers his covenant forever,
    the word he commanded, for a thousand generations,
    16 the covenant he made with Abraham,
    the oath he swore to Isaac.
    17 He confirmed it to Jacob as a decree,
    to Israel as an everlasting covenant:
    18 “To you I will give the land of Canaan
    as the portion you will inherit.”
    19 When they were but few in number,
    few indeed, and strangers in it,
    20 they wandered from nation to nation,
    from one kingdom to another.
    21 He allowed no man to oppress them;
    for their sake he rebuked kings:
    22 “Do not touch my anointed ones;
    do my prophets no harm.”
    23 Sing to the LORD, all the earth;
    proclaim his salvation day after day.
    24 Declare his glory among the nations,
    his marvelous deeds among all peoples.
    25 For great is the LORD and most worthy of praise;
    he is to be feared above all gods.
    26 For all the gods of the nations are idols,
    but the LORD made the heavens.
    27 Splendor and majesty are before him;
    strength and joy in his dwelling place.
    28 Ascribe to the LORD, O families of nations,
    ascribe to the LORD glory and strength,
    29 ascribe to the LORD the glory due his name.
    Bring an offering and come before him;
    worship the LORD in the splendor of his holiness.
    30 Tremble before him, all the earth!
    The world is firmly established; it cannot be moved.
    31 Let the heavens rejoice, let the earth be glad;
    let them say among the nations, “The LORD reigns!”
    32 Let the sea resound, and all that is in it;
    let the fields be jubilant, and everything in them!
    33 Then the trees of the forest will sing,
    they will sing for joy before the LORD,
    for he comes to judge the earth.
    34 Give thanks to the LORD, for he is good;
    his love endures forever.
    35 Cry out, “Save us, O God our Savior;
    gather us and deliver us from the nations,
      that we may give thanks to your holy name,
    that we may glory in your praise.”
    36 Praise be to the LORD, the God of Israel,
    from everlasting to everlasting.
    Then all the people said “Amen” and “Praise the LORD.”

16:7 This verse serves to stress the role of Asaph and his kinsmen and to establish that their appointment went back to David. The NASB translation is closer to the Hebrew: “Then on that day David first assigned Asaph and his relatives to give thanks to the LORD” (cf. NRSV). The NIV translates lĕhōdôt (lit. “to give thanks”) as “this psalm of thanks.” The NIV suggests that the psalm which follows was given by David to Asaph, but the Hebrew does not say that a psalm was given, only that the act of “giving thanks” was placed into the hand (bĕyad) of Asaph.
The psalm which follows is a psalm of thanksgiving. The psalm given here contains material found in three well-known psalms: Pss 105:1–15 (vv. 8–22); 96:1–13 (vv. 23–33); 106:1 (v. 34); and 106:47–48 (vv. 35–36).
16:8–13 These verses provide a hymnlike introduction to Asaph’s hymn of thanksgiving. Israel is exhorted to give thanks to the Lord, to call upon his name, and to make known (publicize) among the peoples his deeds (v. 8); to sing to him, sing praise to him, and talk of all his wonderful works (v. 9); to glory in his holy name, to let those who seek rejoice (v. 10); to look to the Lord and his strength, and seek his face continually (v. 11); to remember the marvelous works he has done, his miracles, and the judgments of his mouth (v. 12). The psalm then addresses the people: “O descendants of Israel his servant, O sons of Jacob, his chosen ones” (v. 13).
16:14–22 This material is also dependent on Psalm 105. It takes up from Ps 105:14 and continues through to Ps 105:22. Particular emphasis is placed on Yahweh’s covenant with Israel (1 Chr 16:15–17) and on the patriarchs. Israel is commanded to remember the covenant.
Verse 19 reads (in Hebrew) “when you were but few,” rather than Ps 105:12 “when they were but few.” The second person “you” would encourage a sense of unity with the patriarchs and their experience with God. When Israel was few and strangers, wandering from nation to nation and from one kingdom to another, the Lord allowed no one to oppress them and rebuked any who tried to do them harm. This would have been an encouragement to the relatively small community of Jews in the Chronicler’s age who found themselves not only few but under foreign domination.
16:23–29 The theme changes. The kingship of Yahweh comes to the fore. If the Chronicler’s readers could identify themselves with their forebears, the patriarchs, who were a politically insignificant group that grew to a significant people as their story unfolded, the people of Israel of the Chronicler’s day might well take hope and look to a brighter future. Their God was a great God whose salvation was to be proclaimed from day to day. He was great and most worthy of praise, to be revered above all gods. The gods of the nations were but idols, but Israel’s God made the heavens. Before him was splendor and majesty; strength and joy were in his dwelling place.
The latter words of v. 29 have been variously understood. The probable meaning of the phrase is that the Lord’s actions always display his holy splendor, for which he deserves holy worship (cf. 2 Chr 20:21; Pss 29:2; 96:9).
16:30–33 “Tremble before him, all the earth!… let them say among the nations, “The LORD reigns!” These words are a powerful statement asserting that Israel’s God, Yahweh, is the supreme ruler over all. All nature responds with joy (vv. 31–33). The Lord will come to judge the earth.
16:34 This verse appears in many settings in the Old Testament (see the refrain in Ps 136). It found its way into various liturgical settings, where it probably had its origin.
16:35–36 These thoughts are similar to Ps 106:47. As Williamson notes, here is a prayer that could have been particularly appropriate to the Chronicler’s own day though not at all inappropriate for David’s day.


(5) Ministry Before the Ark (16:37–43)

37 David left Asaph and his associates before the ark of the covenant of the LORD to minister there regularly, according to each day’s requirements. 38 He also left Obed-Edom and his sixty-eight associates to minister with them. Obed-Edom son of Jeduthun, and also Hosah, were gatekeepers.
39 David left Zadok the priest and his fellow priests before the tabernacle of the LORD at the high place in Gibeon 40 to present burnt offerings to the LORD on the altar of burnt offering regularly, morning and evening, in accordance with everything written in the Law of the LORD, which he had given Israel. 41 With them were Heman and Jeduthun and the rest of those chosen and designated by name to give thanks to the LORD, “for his love endures forever.” 42 Heman and Jeduthun were responsible for the sounding of the trumpets and cymbals and for the playing of the other instruments for sacred song. The sons of Jeduthun were stationed at the gate.
43 Then all the people left, each for his own home, and David returned home to bless his family.

16:37–40 These verses provide a concluding observation or summarizing remark on the way David ordered the Levites. Asaph and his associates were left before the ark to minister there regularly as each day required. Obed-Edom and his sixty-eight associates ministered with them although Obed-Edom and Hosah were gatekeepers. Zadok and his fellow priests were at the tabernacle at Gibeon to attend to the morning and evening burnt offerings in accordance with the law of the Lord.
Some dismiss the tradition of a tent sanctuary at Gibeon as the Chronicler’s fabrication designed to justify Solomon’s early visit to Gibeon (1 Kgs 3:4; 2 Chr 1:3) and bring it into line with the priestly law in Lev 17:8–9. This is unnecessary. The Chronicler may well have had access to older traditions.
16:41 This verse seems to refer to the list in 15:17–22 not specifically mentioned in 16:5, as Levites who ministered before the ark in Jerusalem. The well-known liturgical phrase “for his love endures forever” appears again here. The word “love” (ḥesed) gathers up the ideas of “loyalty,” “faithfulness,” “steadfast love,” an appropriate description of the Lord’s character.
16:42 The sons of Jeduthun were not involved in the playing of music but were gatekeepers. Jeduthun himself was head of one of the guilds of singers. The reason for the change is not given.
16:43 The section on the restoration of the ark is concluded at this point. The Chronicler could now return to his story by describing the important dynastic oracle of Nathan the prophet (cf. 2 Sam 7). The note on the people returning home and David returning to his home to bless his family comes from 2 Sam 6:19b–20a. However, the Chronicler omitted the story of David’s dispute with Michal (2 Sam 6:20b–23). David’s encounter with Michal is mentioned briefly in 15:29, where Michal is said to have despised David. The explanation of 2 Sam 6:20–23 is not given. It is clear, however, from 1 Chr 15:29 that a representative of Saul’s family, Michal, disapproved of David’s care of the ark, a theme that has appeared already in chaps. 13–14.


3. God’s Promise to David:the Dynastic Oracle (17:1–27)

The Chronicler was ready to embark on his primary theme—the building of the temple—but certain steps had yet to be taken. The individual who would actually build the temple had to be identified (chap. 17), the political conditions had to be propitious (chaps. 18–20), the precise site had to be chosen (chap. 21), the materials and plans had to be in hand (chaps. 22; 28–29), and the personnel to undertake the proper functioning of the temple had to be selected and authorized (chaps. 23–27). All of these important items are taken up in the last part of 1 Chronicles, which closes with David’s prayer, the recognition of Solomon as king, and the death of David (chap. 29). The present chapter describes David’s desire to build the temple, a desire that failed to receive God’s blessing (17:1–15).


(1) David’s Plan to Build the Temple and Yahweh’s Disapproval (17:1–15)

1 After David was settled in his palace, he said to Nathan the prophet, “Here I am, living in a palace of cedar, while the ark of the covenant of the LORD is under a tent.”
2 Nathan replied to David, “Whatever you have in mind, do it, for God is with you.”
3 That night the word of God came to Nathan, saying:
4 “Go and tell my servant David, ‘This is what the LORD says: You are not the one to build me a house to dwell in. 5 I have not dwelt in a house from the day I brought Israel up out of Egypt to this day. I have moved from one tent site to another, from one dwelling place to another. 6 Wherever I have moved with all the Israelites, did I ever say to any of their leaders whom I commanded to shepherd my people, “Why have you not built me a house of cedar?’ ”
7 “Now then, tell my servant David, ‘This is what the LORD Almighty says: I took you from the pasture and from following the flock, to be ruler over my people Israel. 8 I have been with you wherever you have gone, and I have cut off all your enemies from before you. Now I will make your name like the names of the greatest men of the earth. 9 And I will provide a place for my people Israel and will plant them so that they can have a home of their own and no longer be disturbed. Wicked people will not oppress them anymore, as they did at the beginning 10 and have done ever since the time I appointed leaders over my people Israel. I will also subdue all your enemies.
“ ‘I declare to you that the LORD will build a house for you: 11 When your days are over and you go to be with your fathers, I will raise up your offspring to succeed you, one of your own sons, and I will establish his kingdom. 12 He is the one who will build a house for me, and I will establish his throne forever. 13 I will be his father, and he will be my son. I will never take my love away from him, as I took it away from your predecessor. 14 I will set him over my house and my kingdom forever; his throne will be established forever.’ ”
15 Nathan reported to David all the words of this entire revelation.

Some interesting political and religious background material from the ancient Near East helps us understand the nature of events in chaps. 17–19. In Near Eastern thought there was a widely recognized relationship between the earthly kingship and the temple of the protecting deity of the city-state. The state was seen as a reflection of the cosmic reality of the divine government, which stood behind the state. The state, with its various hierarchies, culminated in the earthly kingship at its apex. This was thought to be parallel to a cosmic state of affairs with its own gradations in which the major deity headed a pantheon of lesser deities. The ultimate kingship of the protecting deity was thought to be expressed through, and paralleled by, the empirical kingship exercised by the ruler of the city-state on earth. This concept was given concrete expression in the relationship that existed between the temple of the city-state and the palace of the king of the city-state. The temple was the earthly residence of the deity, and the palace was the residence of the earthly representative of the deity, that is, the king.
A remarkable fact about this chapter is that while it sets in motion the events that would culminate in the building of the temple, it actually shows that the temple was not what really was important. David wanted to build a house for God, but God himself would do something far greater in building a house for David. This house, the Davidic dynasty with its eternal and messianic implications, was of far greater importance than any building. This chapter reminds the reader that the house God builds surpasses any human house however grand it may be and however honorable the motivations were behind its building. This should once again remind us that it is superficial to think of the Chronicler as someone who could not see beyond legal and ceremonial religion.
The place where the temple stood was of paramount importance, for it was the point of contact between two worlds—the city-state and the cosmic state. The city-state was the property of, and under the control of, the deity. The choice of a temple site was therefore significant and was preceded by the divine disclosure to the state of the intention of the deity to reside at a particular place. The erection of the temple was an assertion of the divine control over the political and religious life of the state (v. 22).
In 2 Samuel 6 Yahweh, Israel’s King, indicated that he would take up residence in the new Davidic capital. The return of the ark confirmed this. The presence of the ark represented the rule of Yahweh over Israel from Jerusalem. The ark was the footstool of the divine throne (Ps 132:7b; 1 Chr 28:2). The presence of the covenant document here (the tables of stone carrying the Ten Commandments), has a parallel with the depositing of the covenant document at the feet of the gods in the ancient Near East.
The parallels between Near Eastern ideas about the kings of city-states and the titular deity of the state are, to say the least, interesting but may provide important clues about the significance of the return of the ark to Jerusalem and the oracle of Nathan in 2 Sam 7:4–14. We return to the text of 1 Chronicles 17.
17:1 After David had settled in his own palace, he turned his attention to the important matter of the temple. This chapter is based largely on 2 Samuel 7 although there are differences. The Samuel story notes that it was after the Lord had given David rest from all his enemies round about that Nathan delivered his oracle. That remark, which is lacking in Chronicles, implies a lapse of time between the bringing back of the ark to Jerusalem and the expression of David’s desire to build a temple. Nathan the prophet was the intermediary between David and Yahweh. He and his contemporary Gad were typical of God’s spokesmen in the early tenth century B.C. God had his spokesmen in every age, but there were notable prophets in the centuries before the so-called classical prophets of the eighth and following centuries B.C.
David’s concern arose from the fact that while he himself lived in a “palace of cedar,” the ark was in a tent. In keeping with Near Eastern practice, palaces and other grand buildings made lavish use of cedar that often came from Lebanon. Indeed, Hiram, ruler of Tyre, cooperated in supplying this valuable timber all over the east (1 Kgs 5:8, 10; 6:9–10, 15–16, 18; 1 Chr 14:1; 22:4; 2 Chr 2:3, 8). It was incongruous that the ark of the covenant of the Lord should be housed in a tent while the king lived in a fine palace.
17:2–4 Nathan, the prophet, gave approval to David’s place (cf. 2 Sam 7:3). It was, however, an approval Yahweh rejected. In the Samuel account David’s proposal is rejected with a question (2 Sam 7:4–5), but in Chronicles the reply is in the form of a strong command (v. 4). The building of “the house” (note the article) was not forbidden, but David was not the one to undertake the building. The term “house” is used in two senses here. In one sense it refers to a physical structure like a temple or a palace. In the other sense the reference is to a dynasty. God would secure the house of David, that is, the dynasty of David, first of all. The physical house (temple) would come later.
17:5–6 The reference in the first instance is to the wilderness wanderings (Num 33) but could also apply to the pretemple localizations of the shrine at Gibeon, Shiloh, and Nob or even to the wanderings of the ark after the fall of Shiloh. The text in v. 5b requires a second use of “dwelling place,” a different word from “house”—from one tent site to another, from one dwelling place to another.
The “leaders” of v. 6 are literally “judges” (šōpĕṭîm). The traditional “judges” in the Book of Judges were leaders, some of whom were real shepherds of God’s people. Yahweh did not require any of these leaders to build a house of cedar for him.
17:7–10 David was originally a shepherd taken from the pastures and from following the flock to become “ruler” over Israel. This term was deliberately chosen in preference to the word “king,” which had overtones of autocratic rule familiar among the surrounding nations. One of the outstanding marks of David was that he was regarded by many in Israel as a leader, but not as an autocratic king. The divine word through Nathan reminded David that the Lord had been with him wherever he had gone and had cut off his enemies from before him. The Lord’s plan was to grant him a great name and provide his people a place and a secure home free from oppression by wicked people who once harassed them. These words would have conjured up a great sense of longing and encouragement on the part of the Chronicler’s postexilic readers.
17:11–15 The Lord’s intention was to build a house, that is, a “dynasty,” for David and his offspring (lit., Heb. zeraʿ, “seed”) to succeed him when his days were over. This would be one of his own sons whose kingdom the Lord would establish. The Lord would be his father, and he would be Yahweh’s son (Ps 2:7). Nor would the love of the Lord ever be taken away from him as it was removed from Saul, David’s predecessor. David’s heir would have a double significance. He would demonstrate the continuity of David’s throne, and he would be the verification of the Lord’s continuing presence, fulfilling the promise that David’s son would build a “house” (temple) for Yahweh. L. C. Allen notes that v. 12, in its dual focus on temple and dynasty, forms the “focal point” not only of Nathan’s oracle but also of the Chronicler’s message, if taken together with the call to seek God in 2 Chr 7:14. Allen summarizes that these “two verses are Chronicles in a nutshell.”
The Samuel text has an additional comment in 2 Sam 7:14b. “When he does wrong, I will punish him with the rod of men, with floggings inflicted by men. But my love [Heb. ḥesed, “faithfulness”] will never be taken away from him, as I took it away from Saul.” The reason for this omission by the Chronicler is probably that Solomon is pictured in a special way because it was he who would build the temple. To be sure, Solomon perpetrated some misdemeanors, but the dynasty continued. This was the important thing to the Chronicler.
Another difference from the parallel text in 2 Samuel is that here reference is made to “my house and my kingdom” while 2 Sam 7:16 refers to “your house and your kingdom,” that is, David’s house and David’s kingdom. The Chronicles reference is far wider. God is the real King of Israel, and the kingdom is his. It is his right to establish the throne of Israel’s kings, and successful kings of the future could appeal to this idea. It was futile for the Northern Kingdom to resist the descendants of David and Solomon (2 Chr 13:8). Israel’s hope in times of despair was that God would intervene to reestablish his kingdom in the hands of the sons of David.
In the oracle of Nathan there is a messianic significance that can hardly be overestimated. Both 1 Chronicles 17 and 2 Samuel 7 stress that the divine decree indicated that Solomon, David’s son, would build the temple and that his throne would be established forever. But was this oracle relevant to Solomon alone or was there some greater, even some “messianic” significance? A variety of opinions have been offered, but these gather round two perspectives: (1) that the focus is on Solomon alone and (2) that the focus is on “David’s greater son.” The Chronicler gives prominence to the “eternal” reference of the oracle. The phrase “forever” occurs several times. From the days of Nathan a regular feature of messianic thinking has been to refer to David’s descendants (cf. Isa 11:1–5; Jer 17:24–27; Ezek 34:20–24; Amos 9:11–12; Mic 5:2–4). In light of Old Testament insights, the New Testament pictures Jesus as the son of David (cf. Matt 1:1; Luke 1:30–31). The church in every century has celebrated the reign of Jesus Christ, whose kingdom will have no end (vv. 17–23).


(2) David’s Prayer in Response to the Oracle (17:16–27)

16 Then King David went in and sat before the LORD, and he said:
“Who am I, O LORD God, and what is my family, that you have brought me this far?17 And as if this were not enough in your sight, O God, you have spoken about the future of the house of your servant. You have looked on me as though I were the most exalted of men, O LORD God.
18 “What more can David say to you for honoring your servant? For you know your servant, 19 O LORD. For the sake of your servant and according to your will, you have done this great thing and made known all these great promises.
20 “There is no one like you, O LORD, and there is no God but you, as we have heard with our own ears. 21 And who is like your people Israel—the one nation on earth whose God went out to redeem a people for himself, and to make a name for yourself, and to perform great and awesome wonders by driving out nations from before your people, whom you redeemed from Egypt? 22 You made your people Israel your very own forever, and you, O LORD, have become their God.
23 “And now, LORD, let the promise you have made concerning your servant and his house be established forever. Do as you promised, 24 so that it will be established and that your name will be great forever. Then men will say, ‘The LORD Almighty, the God over Israel, is Israel’s God!’ And the house of your servant David will be established before you.
25 “You, my God, have revealed to your servant that you will build a house for him. So your servant has found courage to pray to you. 26 O LORD, you are God! You have promised these good things to your servant. 27 Now you have been pleased to bless the house of your servant, that it may continue forever in your sight; for you, O LORD, have blessed it, and it will be blessed forever.”

The text of David’s prayer here is substantially the same as in 2 Sam 7:18–29 although there are some alterations and omissions. The prayer is offered in the newly established tent shrine in Jerusalem to which the ark has been brought. It acknowledges the greatness and uniqueness of God and refers to the election and deliverance of Israel, revealed especially in the exodus. The continuity of David’s throne also is acknowledged (vv. 23–24). The reference to the exodus in vv. 21–22 is important. The saving events of the exodus were basic in Israel’s theology although they were not always made explicit by the Chronicler. Even Solomon’s prayer of dedication (2 Chr 6) of the temple pays scant attention to the exodus, which is mentioned only in passing (2 Chr 6:5). Those earlier events seem to be lost sight of in the new emphasis on the Davidic covenant.
17:16 David referred to the insignificance of his own family in contrast to the high position he now held. More than that, there was an exciting future hope.
17:17–24 Verse 17b has textual problems, and translators give different renderings. The general drift of the passage seems to be that God has marked out a significant future for David, but there is uncertainty about the exact translation. In the parallel in 2 Sam 7:19, David proclaims that God’s decree is “instruction for the people” (NRSV), a phrase that may have profound messianic implications. The text here, however, is unclear.
In any case David expressed thanks that God had honored him (v. 19). David’s prayer is that the Lord’s promise should be established forever. The frequent use of “forever” and similar phrases points forward to a future beyond David’s time. So David prayed that God’s “name” (fame) should be sure and great forever so that “the LORD Almighty, the God over Israel, is Israel’s God.” Thus will the house of David be established forever before God.
17:25–27 The prayer closes with the invocation: “O LORD, you are God! You have promised these good things to your servant.” Assurance of the Lord’s continuing blessing comes in the final words, “Now you have been pleased to bless the house of your servant, that it may continue forever in your sight; for you, O LORD, have blessed it, and it will be blessed forever.”


4. David’s Wars (18:1–20:8)

The chief reason David was not permitted to build the temple was that he was a man of war (22:8; 28:3). Yet these wars were important to David and to Israel, for they gave security to David and to the nation. It was necessary to establish “rest” before the temple could be built. David himself needed to be “settled in his palace” (17:1), and peace would need to be secured by subduing Israel’s enemies (17:10). All that was not in place till the days of Solomon. But first, David, the man of war and of blood, needed to prepare the way.
Another requirement for the building of the temple was adequate resources. These were a corollary of David’s military exploits (18:8–11). The booty David took in his military campaigns was available to Solomon to build the temple.


(1) David’s Victories (18:1–13)

1 In the course of time, David defeated the Philistines and subdued them, and he took Gath and its surrounding villages from the control of the Philistines.
2 David also defeated the Moabites, and they became subject to him and brought tribute.
3 Moreover, David fought Hadadezer king of Zobah, as far as Hamath, when he went to establish his control along the Euphrates River. 4 David captured a thousand of his chariots, seven thousand charioteers and twenty thousand foot soldiers. He hamstrung all but a hundred of the chariot horses.
5 When the Arameans of Damascus came to help Hadadezer king of Zobah, David struck down twenty-two thousand of them. 6 He put garrisons in the Aramean kingdom of Damascus, and the Arameans became subject to him and brought tribute. The LORD gave David victory everywhere he went.
7 David took the gold shields carried by the officers of Hadadezer and brought them to Jerusalem. 8 From Tebah and Cun, towns that belonged to Hadadezer, David took a great quantity of bronze, which Solomon used to make the bronze Sea, the pillars and various bronze articles.
9 When Tou king of Hamath heard that David had defeated the entire army of Hadadezer king of Zobah, 10 he sent his son Hadoram to King David to greet him and congratulate him on his victory in battle over Hadadezer, who had been at war with Tou. Hadoram brought all kinds of articles of gold and silver and bronze.
11 King David dedicated these articles to the LORD, as he had done with the silver and gold he had taken from all these nations: Edom and Moab, the Ammonites and the Philistines, and Amalek.
12 Abishai son of Zeruiah struck down eighteen thousand Edomites in the Valley of Salt. 13 He put garrisons in Edom, and all the Edomites became subject to David. The LORD gave David victory everywhere he went.

A survey of David’s victories is provided in vv. 1–13. It is drawn from 2 Sam 8:1–14. Here again we must remind ourselves of how these chapters must have looked to the Chronicler’s original readers. Wilcock has drawn attention to the glorious character of the Davidic monarchy in chaps. 14; 18–20—his fame, prestige among the nations, and many victories—and to the fact that the postexilic community in Jerusalem had none of these things. We can sympathize here. Just as the Jews have seen their nation diminished to insignificance on the world stage, so also we can see the waning influence of the church in Western society. The point in Chronicles is surely not that the Jews of the Chronicler’s day should aspire to military greatness again; they were genuinely puny in comparison to Persia. Rather, the message here is that God continues to be God of all nations. Just as he could raise up a David, so also he could control events in the heart of the Persian Empire (as illustrated by the Book of Esther). Rather, for the Chronicler’s original readers and for us, the message is that we should see that the real prestige of the people of God is in the person of David’s greater son, the Messiah.
18:1 Israel had encountered the Philistines on a number of occasions in defensive wars (chaps. 10–11; 14). But defensive wars were not enough. David needed to take the offensive (2 Sam 8:1). Details are lacking though Gath and its surrounding villages were snatched from the control of the Philistines. This secured David’s west flank.
18:2 Moab was defeated and brought into subjection and compelled to bring tribute.
18:3–4 To the northeast of David’s domain lay the Aramean states. One of these was the kingdom of Hadadezer of Zobah, whose kingdom reached to Hamath. David encountered Hadadezer when he went to establish his control along the Euphrates River. He captured chariots, charioteers, and foot soldiers. The parallel list in 2 Sam 8:4 of what David captured is slightly different due to apparent copyist errors. Where Chronicles reads (literally) “a thousand chariots and seven thousand charioteers,” 2 Sam 8:4 has “a thousand [missing word?] and seven hundred charioteers.” That seven thousand charioteers is also given in 1 Chr 19:18 and that the LXX of 2 Sam 8:4 and a Qumran text (4QSama) agrees with 1 Chr 18:4 leads us to suspect that it is the Samuel text which has suffered in transmission.
18:5–6 The help sent by the Arameans of Damascus to assist the king of Zobah was neutralized when David struck down twenty-two thousand of them (the word for “thousand” may refer to a military grouping—see on 5:18; 7:1–5) and placed garrisons in the Aramean kingdom of Damascus, which became subject to him and brought him tribute. The Lord gave victory to David everywhere he went, a further sign of God’s blessing.
18:7–8 Reference is made to the booty David obtained, gold shields from Hadadezer and bronze from Tibhath and Cun. The bronze was used in the preparation of items for Solomon’s temple.
18:9–10 Others had suffered under Hadadezer. The gifts brought by Tou, king of Hamath, expressed thanks not only to David but to David’s God.
18:11 These gifts and the booty taken from Edom, Moab, Ammon, the Philistines, and Amalek were dedicated to the Lord. They would find their way into the collection of metals required for the temple. Edom appears in 2 Sam 8:12 as Aram. The confusion between these two results from the fact that the Hebrew consonants r (ר) and d (ד) are very much alike. Both Aram and Edom had been subjected to raids from David, and either name would be acceptable. In the list of nations here, neither the Ammonites nor the Amalekites has been previously mentioned.
18:12–13 There is a mention of the activities of Abishai, son of Zeruiah, in Edom, where he struck down eighteen thousand Edomites in the Valley of Salt. Again the word for “thousand” may refer to some military grouping and not a numerical usage. David put garrisons in Edom, and the Edomites became his vassals. The heading to Psalm 60 refers to an event when Joab returned from war in Aram and killed twelve thousand in the Valley of Salt. Joab was also a son of Zeruiah and was in command of David’s army (1 Chr 18:15). According to 2 Sam 8:13, David was responsible for the Edomites’ defeat, but both Joab and Abishai may have acted in concert under David’s direction. Alternately, there may have been a textual corruption of 2 Sam 8:13 and Psalm 60. The point is made again that “The LORD gave David victory everywhere he went,” further stressing how God blessed David for his faithfulness.


(2) David’s Officials (18:14–17)

14 David reigned over all Israel, doing what was just and right for all his people. 15 Joab son of Zeruiah was over the army; Jehoshaphat son of Ahilud was recorder; 16 Zadok son of Ahitub and Ahimelech son of Abiathar were priests; Shavsha was secretary; 17 Benaiah son of Jehoiada was over the Kerethites and Pelethites; and David’s sons were chief officials at the king’s side.

18:14 The growth of David’s domains necessitated some organization to care for their administration. The Chronicler notes that it was over “all Israel” that David reigned. The character of his rule was that he ruled with justice and rectitude. This statement enhanced still further David’s reputation. He was an ideal ruler. Justice and right doing marked his whole administration.
18:15–17 David’s leading administrators were Joab, son of Zeruiah, as commander-in-chief of the army; Jehoshaphat, son of Ahilud, his recorder (spokesman or chief of protocol); Zadok, son of Ahitub, and Ahimelech were priests; Shavsha was the secretary or royal scribe; Benaiah, son of Jehoiada, was in charge of the professional military corps. He was over the mercenaries, the Kerethites, and Pelethites; David’s sons were lieutenants or personal adjutants. Second Sam 8:18 names David’s sons as priests, but the Chronicler evidently did not regard this as legitimate because they were laymen even though both David and Solomon exercised what were strictly priestly duties on some official occasions. It is possible, however, that the term for priest (kōhēn) was confused with the term for “administrator” (sōkēn). The evidence of the versions and the context would support this. By the Chronicler’s day this latter term was rare and had largely fallen out of use.
This was a carefully planned administration, a sort of cabinet. Certain parallels with Egyptian models have been noted. The “recorder” was parallel to the royal herald in the Egyptian court whose duties included regulation of the palace ceremonies, admission to royal audiences, reporting to the king matters concerning the people and the country, reporting the orders of the king to the people as the official interpreter, accompanying the king on his travels as his personal secretary, arranging for the stages of his itinerary, and serving as chief of police for the pharaoh.


(3) David’s Campaigns Against the Ammonites (19:1–20:3)

1 In the course of time, Nahash king of the Ammonites died, and his son succeeded him as king. 2 David thought, “I will show kindness to Hanun son of Nahash, because his father showed kindness to me.” So David sent a delegation to express his sympathy to Hanun concerning his father.
When David’s men came to Hanun in the land of the Ammonites to express sympathy to him, 3 the Ammonite nobles said to Hanun, “Do you think David is honoring your father by sending men to you to express sympathy? Haven’t his men come to you to explore and spy out the country and overthrow it?” 4 So Hanun seized David’s men, shaved them, cut off their garments in the middle at the buttocks, and sent them away.
5 When someone came and told David about the men, he sent messengers to meet them, for they were greatly humiliated. The king said, “Stay at Jericho till your beards have grown, and then come back.”
6 When the Ammonites realized that they had become a stench in David’s nostrils, Hanun and the Ammonites sent a thousand talents of silver to hire chariots and charioteers from Aram Naharaim, Aram Maacah and Zobah. 7 They hired thirty-two thousand chariots and charioteers, as well as the king of Maacah with his troops, who came and camped near Medeba, while the Ammonites were mustered from their towns and moved out for battle.
8 On hearing this, David sent Joab out with the entire army of fighting men. 9 The Ammonites came out and drew up in battle formation at the entrance to their city, while the kings who had come were by themselves in the open country.
10 Joab saw that there were battle lines in front of him and behind him; so he selected some of the best troops in Israel and deployed them against the Arameans. 11 He put the rest of the men under the command of Abishai his brother, and they were deployed against the Ammonites. 12 Joab said, “If the Arameans are too strong for me, then you are to rescue me; but if the Ammonites are too strong for you, then I will rescue you. 13 Be strong and let us fight bravely for our people and the cities of our God. The LORD will do what is good in his sight.”
14 Then Joab and the troops with him advanced to fight the Arameans, and they fled before him. 15 When the Ammonites saw that the Arameans were fleeing, they too fled before his brother Abishai and went inside the city. So Joab went back to Jerusalem.
16 After the Arameans saw that they had been routed by Israel, they sent messengers and had Arameans brought from beyond the River, with Shophach the commander of Hadadezer’s army leading them.
17 When David was told of this, he gathered all Israel and crossed the Jordan; he advanced against them and formed his battle lines opposite them. David formed his lines to meet the Arameans in battle, and they fought against him. 18 But they fled before Israel, and David killed seven thousand of their charioteers and forty thousand of their foot soldiers. He also killed Shophach the commander of their army.
19 When the vassals of Hadadezer saw that they had been defeated by Israel, they made peace with David and became subject to him.
So the Arameans were not willing to help the Ammonites anymore.
1 In the spring, at the time when kings go off to war, Joab led out the armed forces. He laid waste the land of the Ammonites and went to Rabbah and besieged it, but David remained in Jerusalem. Joab attacked Rabbah and left it in ruins. 2 David took the crown from the head of their king—its weight was found to be a talent of gold, and it was set with precious stones—and it was placed on David’s head. He took a great quantity of plunder from the city 3 and brought out the people who were there, consigning them to labor with saws and with iron picks and axes. David did this to all the Ammonite towns. Then David and his entire army returned to Jerusalem.

This section contains the account of David’s wars against potential invaders of his territory. It further illustrates the fact that David was a man of war and thus disqualified from building the temple. Nevertheless, just as he was successful in campaigns against the Philistines, Moab, Aram, and Edom, so also in his war against Ammon he was granted victory and success, enjoying Yahweh’s further blessing on his enterprises. The Chronicler devoted considerable space to the Ammonite campaigns. The account is based on 2 Sam 10:1–11:1; 12:26, 30–31 although it omits the disgraceful affair of David’s seduction of Bathsheba. We are not able to place the Ammonite campaign into a chronological perspective although it would seem that David had taken care of Moab and Edom before this so as to obviate any attacks on his southern flank. Perhaps also a secure southern flank would give him confidence to undertake his Aramean campaigns. Perhaps Ammon was also well in control before he embarked on his Aramean adventure.
19:1–2 The conflict with Ammon was provoked by a foolish act on the part of the new king, Hanun. On the death of Hanun’s father, Nahash, David sought to secure good relations with Hanun in return for the kindness shown to David earlier, in the days of Saul. So David sent a delegation to Hanun to express his sympathy.
19:3 Hanun was suspicious, no doubt because he had witnessed that acts of kindness sometimes were a cover for treachery. His nobles interpreted the visit as a not-too-subtle attempt to explore and to spy out the country with a view to attacking Ammonite territory.
19:4 For the ancient Israelites, it was a matter of great shame to have one’s beard shaved off and buttocks exposed.
19:5 David was not a man to trifle with, and Hanun soon set about organizing help. At the same time, David showed sensitivity about the humiliation of his own men and gave them a leave of absence until their beards grew back.
19:6–7 Realizing that David would be greatly offended, Hanun and the Ammonites set about hiring chariots and charioteers from Mesopotamia (Aram Naharaim) and from two other Aramean states, Maacah and Zobah. The huge number of chariots and charioteers, thirty-two thousand, may be expressed in terms of some military unit of uncertain magnitude (see on 5:18; 7:1–5). The assembly of Arameans at Medeba in Moab, south of Ammon, seems to be too far south. Other places have been conjectured such as “the water of Rabbah” (2 Sam 12:27), but such suggestions are speculative. It seems that a considerable force comprising Aramean troops as well as Ammonites prepared for battle.
19:8–9 David’s enemies intended to trap him with a two-flank attack and pin his army between the Ammonites on one side and their allies on the other.
19:10–15 Joab prepared to fight a battle on two fronts. He decided to fight on the front against the Arameans, and he needed someone he could trust to command the troops at the other front, against Ammon. His brother Abishai was the man. He realized that a smaller force could fight a two-front battle to its own advantage if both commanders kept their heads and supplied reinforcements to the other front as needed. He also committed the outcome to God. The enemy was outdone by superior leadership in the Israelite army and the purpose of God.
19:16–19 This was not the final defeat of the Arameans; for hearing of the rout of those helping the Arameans, they brought others from beyond the Euphrates River commanded by Shophach, the commander of Hadadezer’s army, to help them in a new offensive. On this occasion David himself apparently led the army. It was time for the Arameans to make peace with David and become his vassals. They ceased to help the Ammonites (another example of the Lord helping David wherever he went; 18:6, 13; cf. 17:8).
20:1 The Ammonite war dragged on. In the spring the war was taken up again when Joab led Israel’s forces on a campaign in which the land of the Ammonites was laid waste and Rabbah their capital was attacked and left in ruins, although the citadel seems to have remained. King David did not participate in these events. He remained in Jerusalem and became involved in the Bathsheba affair (2 Sam 11–12), which the Chronicler omits because his focus was on David’s divinely empowered achievements. Nevertheless, no one familiar with the story of David’s fall, as the Chronicler’s readers surely were, would miss the ominous allusion to it in this verse, which repeats from 2 Sam 11:1, “In the spring, at the time when kings go off to war.… But David remained in Jerusalem.” Where the Samuel account spotlights David’s troubles resulting from his sin, the Chronicler shows God’s grace at work at the same time. Though David’s personal life was in turmoil, God continued to use his faltering servant to bless the nation.
20:2 David made a sudden and unexpected appearance on the scene. According to 2 Sam 12:27, Joab sent messengers to David to invite him to participate in the final assault on Rabbah so as to have the honor of this victory. The order of events in this final defeat of Ammon is not easy to follow. The Samuel material states that Joab raided the land of Ammon, besieged the capital, and took “the city of waters” (2 Sam 12:27, NASB), probably a portion of the city. Then he advised David to come and direct the final assault against the acropolis and so enjoy the honor resulting from this. David heeded Joab’s advice and was present at the fall of Rabbah. He took the crown from their king (or their god; see NIV text note) and took a great deal of booty. The god of the Ammonites is given as Milkom (“Molech,” NIV) in 1 Kgs 11:5; 2 Kgs 23:13, having the same consonants as the word malkam, here translated “their king.” The term malkam at times must be translated “their king” (Ps 149:2; Jer 30:9; Hos 3:5), but in other places it appears to be an alternative designation for the Ammonite god (Jer 49:1, 3; Zeph 1:5; and probably Amos 1:15). In this verse it could be either, but the weight of the crown would suggest that it refers to the god.
20:3 The citizens of Rabbah were brought out and consigned to forced labor with saws, iron picks, and axes (cf. 2 Sam 12:31). One more kingdom was thus added to David’s jurisdiction, and his prestige was further enhanced.


(4) Wars Against the Philistines (20:4–8)

4 In the course of time, war broke out with the Philistines, at Gezer. At that time Sibbecai the Hushathite killed Sippai, one of the descendants of the Rephaites, and the Philistines were subjugated.
5 In another battle with the Philistines, Elhanan son of Jair killed Lahmi the brother of Goliath the Gittite, who had a spear with a shaft like a weaver’s rod.
6 In still another battle, which took place at Gath, there was a huge man with six fingers on each hand and six toes on each foot—twenty-four in all. He also was descended from Rapha. 7 When he taunted Israel, Jonathan son of Shimea, David’s brother, killed him.
8 These were descendants of Rapha in Gath, and they fell at the hands of David and his men.

To conclude his survey of David’s wars, the Chronicler returns to further victories over the Philistines. His material is based on 2 Sam 21:18–22. Three episodes are mentioned in these verses, but there doubtless were many skirmishes during the early part of David’s reign. One by one David subdued centers of trouble. Each of the three incidents mentioned in these verses features the “giants” of the area.
20:4 The first encounter mentioned was at Gezer, one of the walled cities of the area. Also called Gob in 2 Sam 21:8, it is a place not otherwise known, but the Amarna letters mention a site called Gubba in the vicinity of the better-known Gezer. Evidently some fighting had taken place in the area when Sibbecai, the Hushathite, killed Sippai, one of the Rephaites (a giant). We are not told how David became involved, but the Philistines were subjugated, another victory for David.
20:5 In another encounter Elhanan, son of Jair, killed Lahmi, brother of Goliath the Gittite (i.e., a person from of Gath), who had a spear with a shaft like a weaver’s rod. This verse presents some textual problems. According to 2 Sam 21:19, Elhanan slew Goliath. The text of 2 Sam 21:19 names the father of Elhanan as Jaareoregim. The word oregim is identical in the Hebrew text to the last word of the verse, “weavers,” in the phrase “like a rod of weavers.” Furthermore, in 2 Sam 21:19 Elhanan’s father is called a Bethlehemite, written bêt hallaḥmî, which easily could be confused with the name laḥmî (“Lahmi”). All this suggests the verse has suffered transcriptional difficulties. We do not know the exact reading of the original, but it likely is to have been closer to this text in Chronicles (note the NIV translation of 2 Sam 21:19).
20:6–8 A third encounter took place at Gath, where Jonathan, son of Shimea, David’s brother, killed a giant, a huge man with six fingers on each hand and six toes on each foot. All these unusually large men were descendants of Rapha of Gath, but they fell at the hands of David and his men, who were able to flush out Philistine resistance.
The closing words of vv. 3, 8 and the statement in v. 4 that the Philistines were subjugated completes the account of how God blessed David’s work and provide a fitting climax to the Chronicler’s story of all the work he had done prior to the building of the temple. One further insight into the methods of the Chronicler comes in the omission of the incident where Ishbibenob, another giant, sought to kill David (2 Sam 21:16–17). According to 2 Sam 21:17, David’s men adjured him not to go out to battle again lest the lamp of Israel be quenched. The Chronicler bypassed several of David’s personal faults and family history. Nothing was allowed to interrupt God’s plan to have a home in Jerusalem where he could dwell among his people. God’s plans were brought to fruition despite the frailties of those through whom he carried out his work.


5. David’s Census and the Choice of Jerusalem for the Temple Site (21:1–22:1)

1 Satan rose up against Israel and incited David to take a census of Israel. 2 So David said to Joab and the commanders of the troops, “Go and count the Israelites from Beersheba to Dan. Then report back to me so that I may know how many there are.”
3 But Joab replied, “May the LORD multiply his troops a hundred times over. My lord the king, are they not all my lord’s subjects? Why does my lord want to do this? Why should he bring guilt on Israel?”
4 The king’s word, however, overruled Joab; so Joab left and went throughout Israel and then came back to Jerusalem. 5 Joab reported the number of the fighting men to David: In all Israel there were one million one hundred thousand men who could handle a sword, including four hundred and seventy thousand in Judah.
6 But Joab did not include Levi and Benjamin in the numbering, because the king’s command was repulsive to him. 7 This command was also evil in the sight of God; so he punished Israel.
8 Then David said to God, “I have sinned greatly by doing this. Now, I beg you, take away the guilt of your servant. I have done a very foolish thing.”
9 The LORD said to Gad, David’s seer, 10 “Go and tell David, ‘This is what the LORD says: I am giving you three options. Choose one of them for me to carry out against you.’ ”
11 So Gad went to David and said to him, “This is what the LORD says: ‘Take your choice: 12 three years of famine, three months of being swept away before your enemies, with their swords overtaking you, or three days of the sword of the LORD—days of plague in the land, with the angel of the LORD ravaging every part of Israel.’ Now then, decide how I should answer the one who sent me.”
13 David said to Gad, “I am in deep distress. Let me fall into the hands of the LORD, for his mercy is very great; but do not let me fall into the hands of men.”
14 So the LORD sent a plague on Israel, and seventy thousand men of Israel fell dead. 15 And God sent an angel to destroy Jerusalem. But as the angel was doing so, the LORD saw it and was grieved because of the calamity and said to the angel who was destroying the people, “Enough! Withdraw your hand.” The angel of the LORD was then standing at the threshing floor of Araunah the Jebusite.
16 David looked up and saw the angel of the LORD standing between heaven and earth, with a drawn sword in his hand extended over Jerusalem. Then David and the elders, clothed in sackcloth, fell facedown.
17 David said to God, “Was it not I who ordered the fighting men to be counted? I am the one who has sinned and done wrong. These are but sheep. What have they done? O LORD my God, let your hand fall upon me and my family, but do not let this plague remain on your people.”
18 Then the angel of the LORD ordered Gad to tell David to go up and build an altar to the LORD on the threshing floor of Araunah the Jebusite. 19 So David went up in obedience to the word that Gad had spoken in the name of the LORD.
20 While Araunah was threshing wheat, he turned and saw the angel; his four sons who were with him hid themselves. 21 Then David approached, and when Araunah looked and saw him, he left the threshing floor and bowed down before David with his face to the ground.
22 David said to him, “Let me have the site of your threshing floor so I can build an altar to the LORD, that the plague on the people may be stopped. Sell it to me at the full price.”
23 Araunah said to David, “Take it! Let my lord the king do whatever pleases him. Look, I will give the oxen for the burnt offerings, the threshing sledges for the wood, and the wheat for the grain offering. I will give all this.”
24 But King David replied to Araunah, “No, I insist on paying the full price. I will not take for the LORD what is yours, or sacrifice a burnt offering that costs me nothing.”
25 So David paid Araunah six hundred shekels of gold for the site. 26 David built an altar to the LORD there and sacrificed burnt offerings and fellowship offerings. He called on the LORD, and the LORD answered him with fire from heaven on the altar of burnt offering.
27 Then the LORD spoke to the angel, and he put his sword back into its sheath. 28 At that time, when David saw that the LORD had answered him on the threshing floor of Araunah the Jebusite, he offered sacrifices there. 29 The tabernacle of the LORD, which Moses had made in the desert, and the altar of burnt offering were at that time on the high place at Gibeon. 30 But David could not go before it to inquire of God, because he was afraid of the sword of the angel of the LORD.
1 Then David said, “The house of the LORD God is to be here, and also the altar of burnt offering for Israel.”

Having cut off David’s enemies, God then provided for Israel a place (cf. 1 Chr 17:8–9). It may also be said that having empowered Israel to defeat their human foes, God provided a place of atonement and divine manifestation whereby they could defeat (or hold at bay) their nonhuman enemy, Satan.
The temple site was designated following an incident in which David called for a census. Because of inadequate ritual preparations for the calling of a census, David’s action incurred the Lord’s wrath. This led to the purchase of a farmer’s threshing floor on which to offer an expiatory sacrifice and on which eventually to build the temple and the altar of burnt offering. The Chronicler made use of 2 Samuel 24 but did so with his own unique perspective. It becomes clear that the basic reason for using this story was not so much that David had failed to observe certain ritual requirements but that David’s offense led to the purchase of the threshing floor of Araunah, which became the site for the temple.
We need to understand some facts about the conduct of a census in Israel. The precise reason for this particular census is not given. The major reason for taking a census in Israel was to lay the basis for levying taxes (Exod 30:12; Num 3:40–51) or registering men for military service (Num 26:1–4). But a census for the purpose of conducting an unauthorized military campaign was hardly likely to be approved. In the present case it may have been a census to be used as a basis for corvée (forced or unpaid labor for some national enterprise) in view of the building of the temple. There always was a risk in the assembly of a large body of men that an epidemic might break out. Ritual precautions were needed, involving confession, penitence, and the offering of sacrifices and prayers. Such ritual preparations were not peculiar to Israel but were known in Mesopotamia. In Israel people enrolled for military service were required to pay a ransom and to be ritually purified. Otherwise a plague would result. The half-shekel of Exod 30:12 was a precaution against a breach of purity laws. In David’s case there apparently was not only a problem with motive but also some breach in ritual preparation, although the reason for the plague is not spelled out.
21:1 The figure of Satan appears clearly only in three passages in the Old Testament (Job 1:12; 2:6; Zech 3:1–2). The word generally has the article and means “The Accuser.” Here it is without the article (śātān), suggesting that it was used as a proper name. In Zech 3:1–2 he appears in the heavenly court to accuse Joshua, the high priest. In Job 1–2 he appears among “the sons of God” to accuse Job and then to afflict Job, but within limits imposed by God (Job 1:12; 2:6). In 2 Sam 24:1 it was the Lord whose anger against Israel (the reason is not given) led him to “incite” David to count Israel. Satan is not mentioned there. At any rate, the Samuel passage suggests that the sinful designs of Satan and David were used by the Lord as agents of his wrath. The Chronicler’s focus, however, is on the immediate rather than the ultimate cause. Joab and his commanders (military personnel) were given the task of counting Israel.
21:3 While the exact nature of the offense involved in taking a census is unclear to us, Joab had no doubt that it would bring guilt on the nation and expressed himself strongly. David’s persistence left him without excuse since he had been forewarned.
21:4–7 The military nature of the census is suggested not only by General Joab’s involvement but also from the report of its results. The number of fighting men in all Israel that David could muster was 1,100,000, including 470,000 from Judah. The tribes of Levi and Benjamin were omitted. The exclusion of Levi is explained because they were excluded from military service (Num 1:49; 2:33). Benjamin’s exclusion may have been because the tabernacle rested at Gibeon (1 Chr 21:29).
21:8–14 The narrative telling of David’s choice of punishment is based on 2 Sam 24:10b–15. How David recognized that he had done wrong in taking the census is not explained, but Gad may have rebuked him. Gad was one of those early prophets, like Nathan, who exercised a prophetic ministry but whose utterances were never recorded in a written record like the latter prophets. He brought Yahweh’s word and offered David one of three options: (a) three years of famine, (b) three months of fleeing before his enemies, (c) three days of pestilence. David did not choose but cast himself on the mercy of God. This is a sign of true repentance—he left all in God’s hands and did not seek to determine the way that might have seemed easiest for him.
It is important to recognize here also that regardless of what or who “incited” David to take the census, he is held accountable for the action, which is judged as sin (cf. also v. 17).
21:15–19 The verb translated in the NIV as “was grieved” (nḥm) appears many times in the Old Testament and frequently is translated as “repented” (Gen 6:6; see 1 Sam 15:11, 29, 35). But at least in human terms God does not repent or change his mind. It is better to think of a divine decree going forth that would be fulfilled unless a change of circumstance came about, such as repentance. In that case there was no need to carry out the threatened judgment. In the incident before us there was evidence of a deep repentance on David’s part. In this he was joined by the elders, all clothed in sackcloth. But David’s repentance cut deeply into his own conscience since the people were suffering for his sin. At the time the angel of the Lord was standing at the threshing floor of Araunah (or alternatively, Ornan), the prophet Gad was sent to tell David to build an altar to the Lord on the threshing floor of Araunah, the Jebusite. This, of course, had to be negotiated. An interesting difference between the accounts in Chronicles and Samuel is that in 2 Samuel 24 God himself gives the command to David whereas here it is the angel of the Lord who orders the prophet Gad to tell David to build an altar on the threshing floor of Araunah.
21:20–21 Some commentators have seen parallels between this story and the story of Gideon in Judges 6. The themes are similar—the encounter of an angel with a man threshing wheat and the consumption of an offering with a supernatural fire (cf. Judg 6:11–21). There are parallels, to be sure, but what significance should be attached to these is by no means certain.
21:22–26 There was an urgent need to build an altar to the Lord so that the plague on the people might be stopped. David paid a fairly high price for the land in spite of Araunah’s offer and showed himself to be above the selfish conniving that seeks to avoid personal payment or loss (cf. Mal 1:8–14). We are reminded of Abraham’s purchase of the cave of Machpelah for Sarah’s burial in spite of Ephron’s generous response (Gen 23). The text does not indicate whether David personally made the sacrifice or whether a priest was present to officiate, although on superficial reading it appears that David himself made the sacrifice. This seems surprising in light of the Chronicler’s concern with ritual purity (contrast 1 Sam 13:1–15). In any case, the consumption of the sacrifice by fire from heaven served to confirm God’s acceptance of David’s sacrifice (see 1 Kgs 18:36–40) and pointed forward to the successful completion and dedication of the temple (cf. 2 Chr 7:1).
21:27–22:1 The plague was lifted, the angel returned his sword to its sheath, and the site for the temple had been determined. The Chronicler now gives an explanation of why the center of worship in Israel could be moved from Gibeon to Jerusalem. Through the centuries continuity had been preserved. The worship at the altar of the Mosaic tabernacle (cf. Lev 9:24) gave way to the worship at Gibeon and finally at the Jerusalem temple. Thus David could declare, “The house of the LORD God is to be here, and also the altar of burnt offering for Israel.” Furthermore, in 2 Chr 3:1 we are told that this site was none other than Moriah, the place where Abraham offered his son Isaac as a sacrifice (Gen 22:2). Many years later Jesus would die in Jerusalem on Calvary, completing the work of atonement and defeating Satan “once for all” (Heb 7:26–28; Col 2:15). The events that led to the choice of this place were of God’s doing. This was the place where divine wrath and divine mercy would meet.


6. David’s First Speech:Solomon Chosen to Build the Temple (22:2–19)

The Chronicler includes three speeches by David: (1) 22:2–19; (2) 28:1–21; (3) 29:1–9. Chapters 22–29 are unique to Chronicles, having no parallel in the Bible.


(1) Materials Needed for the Building of the Temple (22:2–5)

2 So David gave orders to assemble the aliens living in Israel, and from among them he appointed stonecutters to prepare dressed stone for building the house of God. 3 He provided a large amount of iron to make nails for the doors of the gateways and for the fittings, and more bronze than could be weighed. 4 He also provided more cedar logs than could be counted, for the Sidonians and Tyrians had brought large numbers of them to David.
5 David said, “My son Solomon is young and inexperienced, and the house to be built for the LORD should be of great magnificence and fame and splendor in the sight of all the nations. Therefore I will make preparations for it.” So David made extensive preparations before his death.

22:2 The stone probably was limestone, which was readily available near Jerusalem. Indeed, numbers of ancient stone quarries can still be seen in the neighborhood of Jerusalem. David drew upon the resident aliens to prepare stone for the temple structure. The resident aliens appointed stonecutters to prepare dressed stone, large ashlar masonry, for building the house of God. Those resident aliens or sojourners formed an important group in ancient Israel. Israel had significant obligations toward them. They were allowed to join in the Passover, for example. But they were called upon for the permanent corvée, although the Israelites could be called upon for temporary conscription. David appointed Adoniram over the forced labor contingent (2 Sam 20:24), a task he continued under Solomon and Rehoboam (1 Kgs 12:18).
22:3 Iron sounds cheap to us, but in the early Iron Age it was of great value (see Deut 3:11 and 2 Kgs 6:6). These large quantities of metal came from the booty David captured in his wars.
22:4 Over the centuries cedar from Lebanon found its way into many lands for construction of temples, palaces, and other large buildings. Inscriptions in the buildings of Assyria, Babylonia, and other lands bear testimony to this fact.
22:5 One can almost say that the temple was prefabricated by David. He knew that a young man or boy, however intelligent, is not ready for certain jobs. Solomon’s age at this time cannot be determined.


(2) David’s Charge to Solomon (22:6–16)

6 Then he called for his son Solomon and charged him to build a house for the LORD, the God of Israel. 7 David said to Solomon: “My son, I had it in my heart to build a house for the Name of the LORD my God. 8 But this word of the LORD came to me: ‘You have shed much blood and have fought many wars. You are not to build a house for my Name, because you have shed much blood on the earth in my sight. 9 But you will have a son who will be a man of peace and rest, and I will give him rest from all his enemies on every side. His name will be Solomon, and I will grant Israel peace and quiet during his reign. 10 He is the one who will build a house for my Name. He will be my son, and I will be his father. And I will establish the throne of his kingdom over Israel forever.’
11 “Now, my son, the LORD be with you, and may you have success and build the house of the LORD your God, as he said you would. 12 May the LORD give you discretion and understanding when he puts you in command over Israel, so that you may keep the law of the LORD your God. 13 Then you will have success if you are careful to observe the decrees and laws that the LORD gave Moses for Israel. Be strong and courageous. Do not be afraid or discouraged.
14 “I have taken great pains to provide for the temple of the LORD a hundred thousand talents of gold, a million talents of silver, quantities of bronze and iron too great to be weighed, and wood and stone. And you may add to them. 15 You have many workmen: stonecutters, masons and carpenters, as well as men skilled in every kind of work 16 in gold and silver, bronze and iron—craftsmen beyond number. Now begin the work, and the LORD be with you.”

22:6–10 David is here to Solomon much like Moses was to Joshua. David could do all the preparations for the temple but could not build it, just as Moses could not lead Israel into Canaan. A life of violence, even in God’s service, had disqualified him. The one who built God’s house must be a man of peace. The name “Solomon” (Heb. šĕlōmōh) is a cognate of the word for “peace” (šālôm). Israel would have peace and quiet during his reign (v. 9). On the other hand, we should not forget that it was David’s warfare and many victories that enabled Solomon and the nation to have the peace in which they could build the temple. David was not qualified to build the temple, but he was not thereby condemned in the text.
22:11–13 This invocation includes encouragement, a definition of the task ahead, and the assurance of divine help. It is reminiscent of the charge to Joshua by Moses (Deut 31:23; Josh 1:6–9). In similar fashion Solomon himself prayed for the wisdom necessary for the job that lay ahead of him (1 Kgs 3:9). Without the wisdom that comes from above (Jas 1:5), no one can do God’s work.
22:14–16 The list of materials available to Solomon to build the temple (v. 14) and of the wide variety of artisans ready at hand for the work indicated that there need be no further delay. The quantities specified here seem to be exceptionally large. One explanation is that it was a standard figure of speech for stressing the magnificence of the temple and drawing attention to David’s vast preparations for the temple that was soon to be erected. This sort of hyperbole is often used in ancient literature and speeches, and the round numbers further imply that they are not to be taken literally. Our western propensity to be precise allows little room for a characteristic feature of the literary methods of the ancient Near East. A comparison may be made with the amount of gold that Solomon’s fleet brought to Israel from Ophir (1 Kgs 10:14).


(3) David’s Charge to the Leaders of Israel (22:17–19)

17 Then David ordered all the leaders of Israel to help his son Solomon. 18 He said to them, “Is not the LORD your God with you? And has he not granted you rest on every side? For he has handed the inhabitants of the land over to me, and the land is subject to the LORD and to his people. 19 Now devote your heart and soul to seeking the LORD your God. Begin to build the sanctuary of the LORD God, so that you may bring the ark of the covenant of the LORD and the sacred articles belonging to God into the temple that will be built for the Name of the LORD.”

22:17–19 David’s charge to Solomon was private, preceding the public assembly at which he addressed the leaders of Israel. He ordered the leaders to help his son Solomon, reminding them that God was with them. His primary charge to them, however, was that they should devote their hearts and souls to the Lord. He knew that if they were faithful to God they would be faithful to Solomon. If one places a human duty above duty to God, one will fail at both.


7. David’s Organization of the Priests and Levites (23:1–26:32)

Chapters 23–27 sometimes are looked upon as an interruption, if not an interpolation, in this narrative. In fact, they are very important for showing that David fulfilled all his duties as a good king by seeing to it that the proper worship of the Lord would continue. From the Chronicler’s perspective, the account of David’s reign would be truncated if this material were not included.
The total preparations for the temple included the allocation of personnel to undertake the various spiritual ministries of the temple. These were more crucial than the material structure alone—a perspective that David understood better than many of his modern Christian counterparts. Chapters 23–26 take up various branches of the Levites (chap. 23), priests (chap. 24), musicians (chap. 25), and the gatekeepers and treasury officials (chap. 26). These chapters form a unit in themselves. It seems likely that the Chronicler used for his composition some traditions that were reduced to writing earlier although in their present form they bear unmistakable signs of the Chronicler’s hand.


(1) Divisions of the Levites (23:1–32)

1 When David was old and full of years, he made his son Solomon king over Israel.
2 He also gathered together all the leaders of Israel, as well as the priests and Levites. 3 The Levites thirty years old or more were counted, and the total number of men was thirty-eight thousand. 4 David said, “Of these, twenty-four thousand are to supervise the work of the temple of the LORD and six thousand are to be officials and judges. 5 Four thousand are to be gatekeepers and four thousand are to praise the LORD with the musical instruments I have provided for that purpose.”
6 David divided the Levites into groups corresponding to the sons of Levi: Gershon, Kohath and Merari.
    7 Belonging to the Gershonites:
    Ladan and Shimei.
    8 The sons of Ladan:
    Jehiel the first, Zetham and Joel—three in all.
    9 The sons of Shimei:
    Shelomoth, Haziel and Haran—three in all.
    These were the heads of the families of Ladan.
    10 And the sons of Shimei:
    Jahath, Ziza, Jeush and Beriah.
    These were the sons of Shimei—four in all.
    11 Jahath was the first and Ziza the second, but Jeush and Beriah did not have many sons; so they were counted as one family with one assignment.
    12 The sons of Kohath:
    Amram, Izhar, Hebron and Uzziel—four in all.
    13 The sons of Amram:
    Aaron and Moses.
    Aaron was set apart, he and his descendants forever, to consecrate the most holy things, to offer sacrifices before the LORD, to minister before him and to pronounce blessings in his name forever. 14 The sons of Moses the man of God were counted as part of the tribe of Levi.
    15 The sons of Moses:
    Gershom and Eliezer.
    16 The descendants of Gershom:
    Shubael was the first.
    17 The descendants of Eliezer:
    Rehabiah was the first.
    Eliezer had no other sons, but the sons of Rehabiah were very numerous.
    18 The sons of Izhar:
    Shelomith was the first.
    19 The sons of Hebron:
    Jeriah the first, Amariah the second, Jahaziel the third and Jekameam the fourth.
    20 The sons of Uzziel:
    Micah the first and Isshiah the second.
    21 The sons of Merari:
    Mahli and Mushi.
      The sons of Mahli:
    Eleazar and Kish.
    22 Eleazar died without having sons: he had only daughters. Their cousins, the sons of Kish, married them.
23 The sons of Mushi: Mahli, Eder and Jerimoth—three in all.
24 These were the descendants of Levi by their families—the heads of families as they were registered under their names and counted individually, that is, the workers twenty years old or more who served in the temple of the LORD. 25 For David had said, “Since the LORD, the God of Israel, has granted rest to his people and has come to dwell in Jerusalem forever, 26 the Levites no longer need to carry the tabernacle or any of the articles used in its service.” 27 According to the last instructions of David, the Levites were counted from those twenty years old or more.
28 The duty of the Levites was to help Aaron’s descendants in the service of the temple of the LORD: to be in charge of the courtyards, the side rooms, the purification of all sacred things and the performance of other duties at the house of God. 29 They were in charge of the bread set out on the table, the flour for the grain offerings, the unleavened wafers, the baking and the mixing, and all measurements of quantity and size. 30 They were also to stand every morning to thank and praise the LORD. They were to do the same in the evening 31 and whenever burnt offerings were presented to the LORD on Sabbaths and at New Moon festivals and at appointed feasts. They were to serve before the LORD regularly in the proper number and in the way prescribed for them.
32 And so the Levites carried out their responsibilities for the Tent of Meeting, for the Holy Place and, under their brothers the descendants of Aaron, for the service of the temple of the LORD.

23:1 This verse seems to be a heading that introduces the final chapters of 1 Chronicles. After the organizational details of chaps. 23–27 this verse is resumed in 28:1. The expression “old and full of years” implies a status of great honor (cf. 29:28; Gen 25:8; 35:29; Job 42:17). It was not that Solomon became king at the very close of David’s life. Indeed, there may have been a period of co-regency between David and Solomon based on Egyptian models. The statement means simply that as David grew older and in order to protect the succession, he installed Solomon as king (cf. 1 Kgs 1–2). There is no indication of Solomon’s age at this time.
23:2 David gathered the three leading segments of Israelite society—princes, priests, and Levites. These groups were a stereotyped division of the people current at the time (cf. 13:2; 2 Chr 30:25; 35:8; Ezra 2:70). They will be dealt with in the reverse order in the following chapters: Levites (chap. 23), priests (chap. 24), and others (chaps. 25–27).
23:3–6a The first group to be specified was the Levites. The Chronicler was always anxious to give the Levites an important place. Provision for the temple services begins with the Levites, here specified as men thirty years old and upwards. There is no consistency in the age when a man became a ministering Levite. The age of thirty agrees with the age given in Num 4:3 (but see Num 8:24), although later in 1 Chr 23:24, 27; 2 Chr 31:17 and Ezra 3:8 it is only twenty. The reason for this is not given, but it seems that some variation in age was allowable for the needs at a particular time, especially where Levitical families were depleted. The two ages given in this chapter could be the result of the Chronicler drawing together material from different eras or we could assume that some tasks required a higher age. Of the thirty-eight thousand listed, twenty-four thousand were set apart to supervise the work of the temple, six thousand were to be officials and judges, four thousand were to be gatekeepers, and four thousand were to be musicians to praise the Lord with musical instruments.
The thirty-eight thousand is larger than the number of Levites given elsewhere in Chronicles. It may, of course, be a way of saying that by David’s time the population had grown and was greater also in wealth and power than in the days of Moses. However, there can be no certainty about such suggestions. The Chronicler possibly had access to much earlier material. The “judges” and “officials” represent Levites involved in judicial work. These two terms often are found together in the Old Testament. The “officials” perhaps were record keepers. The reference to supervising the work of the temple (v. 4) does not here refer to the construction of the temple but to activities concerned with the discharge of aspects of general administration of the temple and its services of worship.
The organization of the Levites was based on the three traditional families of Levi in the order followed by all lists (Exod 6:17–18; Num 3; 1 Chr 6).
23:6b–11 Gershon’s first son was Libni (6:17; Exod 6:17; Num 3:18). His second son, as here, was Shimei. The origin of the name “Ladan” is not known although it appears also in 26:21. He may have been a descendant of Libni, who was prominent in later times. Ladan had three sons, Jehiel, Zetham, and Joel (v. 8). The brother of Ladan, Shimei, had four sons, two of whom had small families (v. 11) and were counted as one family, a strange observation but by its nature suggests authenticity.
23:12–24 The sons of Amram included Aaron and Moses. The line of Aaron was excluded from the Levites because it was the priestly family. Verse 13 contains a small explanatory expansion. On the other hand, Moses is regarded as a Levite. It is not clear whether v. 22 was intended to include Eleazar as a father’s house because he had no sons, although Num 27:4 and 36:6 allowed legitimate descent through daughters.
23:25–27 There was a need to change the nature of Levitical service from one of transporting the ark and its implements to one of service in a permanent arrangement in Jerusalem. David had foreseen this. The duty of the Levites was to help Aaron’s descendants in the service of the temple. The Levites were assigned cultic responsibilities, particularly in the area of providing music for the services.
23:28–32 The Levitical duties listed here were only on the periphery of the temple cult and reflect less responsibility than in 9:28–32. They appear to be subordinate to the priests, for they are to stand beside the sons of Aaron, that is, to assist them morning and evening when offerings were presented in the temple. Part of their duty was to provide thanksgiving and praise in the temple, that is, to carry out musical duties. If some of the details of this and subsequent chapters appear trivial and even irrelevant to us, they were evidently important to the Chronicler and his postexilic audience. The details of God’s relationship with his people are significant in every age. Organization and planning is not necessarily contrary to sincerity in worship. As J. G. McConville has written, “Worship can be sublime and spiritual without becoming disorganized; and the converse is probably not true” (cf. 1 Cor 14:40). These chapters also remind us of the many tasks and the many people necessary for proper worship and service (cf. 1 Cor 12:14–31).


(2) Divisions of the Priests and the Rest of the Levites (24:1–31)

1 These were the divisions of the sons of Aaron:
The sons of Aaron were Nadab, Abihu, Eleazar and Ithamar. 2 But Nadab and Abihu died before their father did, and they had no sons; so Eleazar and Ithamar served as the priests. 3 With the help of Zadok a descendant of Eleazar and Ahimelech a descendant of Ithamar, David separated them into divisions for their appointed order of ministering. 4 A larger number of leaders were found among Eleazar’s descendants than among Ithamar’s, and they were divided accordingly: sixteen heads of families from Eleazar’s descendants and eight heads of families from Ithamar’s descendants. 5 They divided them impartially by drawing lots, for there were officials of the sanctuary and officials of God among the descendants of both Eleazar and Ithamar.
6 The scribe Shemaiah son of Nethanel, a Levite, recorded their names in the presence of the king and of the officials: Zadok the priest, Ahimelech son of Abiathar and the heads of families of the priests and of the Levites—one family being taken from Eleazar and then one from Ithamar.
7 The first lot fell to Jehoiarib,
    the second to Jedaiah,
8 the third to Harim,
the fourth to Seorim,
9 the fifth to Malkijah,
the sixth to Mijamin,
10 the seventh to Hakkoz,
the eighth to Abijah,
11 the ninth to Jeshua,
    the tenth to Shecaniah,
12 the eleventh to Eliashib,
the twelfth to Jakim,
13 the thirteenth to Huppah,
the fourteenth to Jeshebeab,
14 the fifteenth to Bilgah,
the sixteenth to Immer,
15 the seventeenth to Hezir,
the eighteenth to Happizzez,
16 the nineteenth to Pethahiah,
the twentieth to Jehezkel,
17 the twenty-first to Jakin,
the twenty-second to Gamul,
18 the twenty-third to Delaiah,
and the twenty-fourth to Maaziah.
19 This was their appointed order of ministering when they entered the temple of the LORD, according to the regulations prescribed for them by their forefather Aaron, as the LORD, the God of Israel, had commanded him.
20 As for the rest of the descendants of Levi:
    from the sons of Amram: Shubael;
    from the sons of Shubael: Jehdeiah.
    21 As for Rehabiah, from his sons:
    Isshiah was the first.
    22 From the Izharites: Shelomoth;
    from the sons of Shelomoth: Jahath.
    23 The sons of Hebron: Jeriah the first, Amariah the second, Jahaziel the third and Jekameam the fourth.
    24 The son of Uzziel: Micah;
    from the sons of Micah: Shamir.
    25 The brother of Micah: Isshiah;
    from the sons of Isshiah: Zechariah.
    26 The sons of Merari: Mahli and Mushi.
    The son of Jaaziah: Beno.
    27 The sons of Merari:
    from Jaaziah: Beno, Shoham, Zaccur and Ibri.
28 From Mahli: Eleazar, who had no sons.
    29 From Kish: the son of Kish:
    Jerahmeel.
    30 And the sons of Mushi: Mahli, Eder and Jerimoth.
These were the Levites, according to their families. 31 They also cast lots, just as their brothers the descendants of Aaron did, in the presence of King David and of Zadok, Ahimelech, and the heads of families of the priests and of the Levites. The families of the oldest brother were treated the same as those of the youngest.

Chapter 24 moves on to give a description of the priestly courses. Hints from later documents suggest that the priestly order depicted here remained in use for many centuries during the second temple period. This chapter deals first with the priestly divisions of the sons of Aaron (24:1–19) and finally returns to some additional Levites (24:20–31). Twenty-four priestly courses are listed. It has been suggested by some commentators that vv. 1–19 in the midst of material on the Levites is out of place and represents an insertion by a reviser. But it is not wise in principle to assume that because we cannot discern an author’s purpose for his literary structure that he did not have one. The section on priests is probably placed here because of the preceding emphasis on the Levites as their helpers “in the service of the temple of the LORD” (23:28).
24:1–2 These divisions of the sons of Aaron follow the biblical tradition found in 1 Chr 6:3; Exod 6:23; Num 3:2–4 with some omissions such as the death of Nadab and Abihu, who died before their father (and before the Lord, Num 3:4). This incident meant that only the families of Eleazar and Ithamar remained for priestly service. Here again the Chronicler has chosen not to include a sinful detail that the informed Jewish reader already would have known. It is not correct to speak of the Chronicler as suppressing this information since there is no indication that he sought to change the historical record. Wilcock compares him to an artist painting a landscape but leaving out an ugly building; he is not trying to fool anyone; he simply does not want anything to distract from the image he is creating.
24:3 Descendants of the two remaining sons of Aaron assisted David in the organization of the priests Zadok, a descendant of Eleazar, and Ahimelech, a descendant of Ithamar (cf. 18:16). Zadok was prominent under both David and Solomon and became firmly established in tradition. He was to become the head of the Zadokite priesthood.
24:4–6 Although the Eleazar line had twice as many representatives as the Ithamar line, duties were divided impartially by drawing lots (cf. 24:31; 25:8; 26:13). The details of the lot drawing are not given, but the larger group was not given any advantage over the smaller since there were officials from both lines. The precise significance of their titles is not certain. The “and” may mean “even,” as in, “There were officials of the sanctuary, even officials of God” (v. 5). Or this latter phrase may have a superlative sense as “outstanding leaders.” The scribe Shemaiah (not otherwise known), a Levite, recorded the names in the presence of the king and the officials—Zadok the priest, Ahimelech, son of Abiathar, and the heads of the priestly and Levitical families, one family being taken from Eleazar and then one from Ithamar. The alternating draw would continue for the first sixteen names, and the remaining eight would have to come from Eleazar.
24:7–18 A list of twenty-four families is given in these verses. These names represent families and not individuals as such. Some of these names do not occur elsewhere: Seorim, Huppah, Jeshebeab, Happizzez, Gamul, and Delaiah, while Jakim and Pethahiah occur only here as names of priests. The list seems to reflect the final stage in the postexilic development of the priestly courses for which there is evidence. The name Abijah (v. 10) is known in Luke 1:5 as the division to which Zechariah the priest, father of John the Baptist, belonged. After his angelic vision in the temple Zechariah was not able to utter the blessing mentioned in 1 Chr 23:13.
24:19 This statement is intended to establish the activities of priests prescribed not merely by David but by Aaron their forefather. Ultimately the choice of these priests goes back to Yahweh himself. It is of some interest that in other ancient Near Eastern lands the practice of assigning priests to specific periods (watches) was well known. In some cases such service was hereditary.
24:20–31 The list of Levites here presupposes and updates the list in 23:6–23 by recapitulating parts of it in the same order and extending them by one generation. Thus to the family of Kohath the line of Shubael is extended to Jehdeiah (v. 20); the line Rehabiah, to Isshiah (v. 21); that of Izhar, to Jahath (v. 22). The Hebron line is not changed (v. 23; 23:19); Uzziel extended to Shamir (v. 24), and so on. A new line is added to Merari, that of Jaaziah, who had three sons. Ten more names were added, apparently reflecting the situation at the time of the author. The addition of only one name in most cases suggests a generation later than the list in chap. 23.


(3) The Temple Musicians (25:1–31)

1 David, together with the commanders of the army, set apart some of the sons of Asaph, Heman and Jeduthun for the ministry of prophesying, accompanied by harps, lyres and cymbals. Here is the list of the men who performed this service:
    2 From the sons of Asaph:
    Zaccur, Joseph, Nethaniah and Asarelah. The sons of Asaph were under the supervision of Asaph, who prophesied under the king’s supervision.
    3 As for Jeduthun, from his sons:
    Gedaliah, Zeri, Jeshaiah, Shimei, Hashabiah and Mattithiah, six in all,
    under the supervision of their father Jeduthun, who prophesied, using the harp in thanking and praising the LORD.
    4 As for Heman, from his sons:
    Bukkiah, Mattaniah, Uzziel, Shubael and Jerimoth; Hananiah, Hanani,
    Eliathah, Giddalti and Romamti-Ezer; Joshbekashah, Mallothi, Hothir and Mahazioth. 5 All these were sons of Heman the king’s seer. They were given him through the promises of God to exalt him. God gave Heman fourteen sons and three daughters.
6 All these men were under the supervision of their fathers for the music of the temple of the LORD, with cymbals, lyres and harps, for the ministry at the house of God. Asaph, Jeduthun and Heman were under the supervision of the king. 7 Along with their relatives—all of them trained and skilled in music for the LORD—they numbered 288. 8 Young and old alike, teacher as well as student, cast lots for their duties.
9 The first lot, which was for Asaph, fell to Joseph,
    his sons and relatives,       12
    the second to Gedaliah,
    he and his relatives and sons,       12
10 the third to Zaccur,
    his sons and relatives,      12
11 the fourth to Izri,
    his sons and relatives,      12
12 the fifth to Nethaniah,
    his sons and relatives,      12
13 the sixth to Bukkiah,
    his sons and relatives,      12
14 the seventh to Jesarelah,
    his sons and relatives,      12
15 the eighth to Jeshaiah,
    his sons and relatives,      12
16 the ninth to Mattaniah,
    his sons and relatives,      12
17 the tenth to Shimei,
    his sons and relatives,      12
18 the eleventh to Azarel,
    his sons and relatives,      12
19 the twelfth to Hashabiah,
    his sons and relatives,       12
20 the thirteenth to Shubael,
    his sons and relatives,      12
21 The fourteenth to Mattithiah,
    his sons and relatives,       12
22 the fifteenth to Jerimoth,
    his sons and relatives,      12
23 the sixteenth to Hananiah,
    his sons and relatives,      12
24 the seventeenth to Joshbekashah,
    his sons and relatives,      12
25 the eighteenth to Hanani,
    his sons and relatives,      12
26 the nineteenth to Mallothi,
    his sons and relatives,      12
27 the twentieth to Eliathah,
    his sons and relatives,      12
28 the twenty-first to Hothir,
his sons and relatives,       12
29 the twenty-second to Giddalti,
    his sons and relatives,      12
30 the twenty-third to Mahazioth,
    his sons and relatives,      12
31 the twenty-fourth to Romamti-Ezer,
his sons and relatives,      12

Chapter 25 is devoted to the temple musicians. They are arranged into twenty-four courses (vv. 9–31) like the priests in chap. 24. The chapter falls into two parts, (1) vv. 1–7 and (2) vv. 8–31. The first part arranges the personnel associated with the music of the temple into three groups—the sons of Asaph, the sons of Jeduthun, and the sons of Heman. The Chronicler placed this list close to the Levites (24:20–31) because of their close association in the cult. The genealogies were designed to show how the contemporary occupants of these posts were linked to their origins in the time of David.
The establishment of a temple choir is in one sense surprising. Elsewhere the Chronicler is profoundly concerned that the worship be carried on in strict accord with the law, which makes no provision for a choir. How then does he justify a levitical choir in David’s reign? J. W. Kleinig observes that the Chronicler uses several strategies to support the validity of this institution. Above all, it was authorized by a prophetic word from Nathan and Gad (2 Chr 29:25). Three other sources of justification for the choir, however, are possible. First, in Num 10:10 the priests are to proclaim the Lord’s grace by blowing trumpets at the altar, and this serves to vindicate the use of music in praise. Second, Deut 10:8 and 18:5 say that the Levites “pronounce blessings” in God’s name (cf. Deut 18:5); hence the use of a levitical choir is reasonable. Third, the general admonitions in Scripture to rejoice in God’s presence allow for worship in song.
25:1 The translation of v. 1 presents some difficulties. David’s helpers were “commanders of the army” or perhaps “cult officials” (AB), “chiefs of the service” (RSV), or “chief officers” (NEB). No doubt these were some of the leaders of the Levites. The Hebrew word for “army” is flexible in meaning. Members of the three families of Asaph, Jeduthun, and Heman—were set apart for service of various kinds, prophesying accompanied by harps, lyres, and cymbals (vv. 2–3, 5; see also 2 Chr 20:14; 29:25–30; 35:15). The nature of their prophesying is not spelled out. But the Levites, or at least their leaders, are referred to with prophetic terminology such as the verb “prophesy” (vv. 1–3) and the noun “seer” (v. 5). At least we are to understand that through the ministry and music of the Levites, God revealed his will to the people, and the people gave thanks and praise to him (v. 3; cf. Num 11:25–30). Some commentators postulate a class of cultic prophets in preexilic Israel with whom the Levitical singers stood in direct continuity. It is noteworthy that the prophesying was done “under the supervision” of temple personnel. In other words, even the prophetic gift was not allowed to disrupt the ceremony and worship in the temple. Similarly, Paul abhorred chaotic worship done in the name of the Spirit (1 Cor 14).
The musical instruments listed here are variously translated: “harps, lyres and cymbals” (NIV); “lyres, harps, and cymbals” (RSV); “zithers, harps and cymbals” (Myers); “harps, lutes and cymbals” (NEB). In a number of areas of translation there are similar problems—plants, precious stones, diseases, clothing, and others. We lack specific samples in many cases.
25:2 Generally speaking the names recorded in chap. 25 are recorded elsewhere as levitical singers. Asharelah may be a conflation of “Asharel” and “these are” in Hebrew.
25:3 The NIV inserts “Shimei” in accordance with the LXX and a Hebrew manuscript (see NIV text note and cf. v. 17).
25:4–5 The fact that Heman was the king’s seer keeps the motif of prophecy prominent among these singers (25:1–3, 5). The gift of many children to Heman, fourteen sons and three daughters, emphasized God’s blessing on him. The names in the second half of v. 4, namely, the last nine of Heman’s sons, differ from the first five and from the usual form of Hebrew names. For example, Giddalti and Romamti look like verb forms, although they were regarded as proper names by the author and were seen as necessary to complete the fourteen sons of Heman.
Some regard vv. 4–5 as a poetic construction, perhaps part of a psalm verse, used in the manner of 16:8–36. J. M. Myers’ translation is:

  Be gracious to me, Yahweh, be gracious to me;
My God art thou;
I have magnified, and I will exalt [my] helper;
Sitting [in] adversity I said,
Clear signs give plentifully.

Myers suggests that we have here a catalog of five “incipits,” that is, the first lines of five separate psalms, which served as their titles. Williamson suggests that members of five separate families or sections of guilds were named after the openings of psalms they were accustomed to singing regularly.
25:6 This verse is a conclusion to vv. 4–5 and is parallel to vv. 2b and 3b. The names of the three leaders are lacking in the LXX and are often omitted by commentators. Such repetitions may simply indicate a stylistic feature of the Chronicler’s writing.
25:7–8 The number 288 represents twenty-four courses of twelve each. There evidently was some kind of program of instruction for these singer-musicians although no details are given.
25:9–31 As S. Japhet has noted, the singers are the only group in these chapters to be identified by both descent (vv. 2–5) and division (vv. 9–31). The order of the divisions is closely related to the first list in that the sons of Asaph formed divisions one, three, five, and seven; the sons of Jeduthun formed divisions two, four, eight, ten, twelve, and fourteen; and the sons of Heman formed divisions six, nine, eleven, thirteen, and fifteen through twenty-four (accounting for spelling variation; see NIV text notes). Such an arrangement shows how the lots were cast, alternating between two groups beginning with Asaph and Jeduthun.


(4) The Gatekeepers (26:1–19)

1 The divisions of the gatekeepers:
From the Korahites: Meshelemiah son of Kore,
one of the sons of Asaph.
    2 Meshelemiah had sons:
    Zechariah the firstborn,
    Jediael the second,
    Zebadiah the third,
    Jathniel the fourth,
    3 Elam the fifth,
    Jehohanan the sixth and Eliehoenai the seventh.
    4 Obed-Edom also had sons:
    Shemaiah the firstborn,
    Jehozabad the second,
    Joah the third,
    Sacar the fourth,
    Nethanel the fifth,
    5 Ammiel the sixth,
    Issachar the seventh
    and Peullethai the eighth.
    (For God had blessed Obed-Edom.)
    6 His son Shemaiah also had sons,
    who were leaders in their father’s family because they were very capable men. 7 The sons of Shemaiah: Othni, Rephael, Obed and Elzabad; his relatives Elihu and Semakiah were also able men. 8 All these were descendants of Obed-Edom; they and their sons and their relatives were capable men with the strength to do the work—descendants of Obed-Edom, 62 in all.
9 Meshelemiah had sons and relatives, who were able men—18 in all.
10 Hosah the Merarite had sons: Shimri the first (although he was not the firstborn, his father had appointed him the first), 11 Hilkiah the second, Tabaliah the third and Zechariah the fourth. The sons and relatives of Hosah were 13 in all.
12 These divisions of the gatekeepers, through their chief men, had duties for ministering in the temple of the LORD, just as their relatives had. 13 Lots were cast for each gate, according to their families, young and old alike.
14 The lot for the East Gate fell to Shelemiah. Then lots were cast for his son Zechariah, a wise counselor, and the lot for the North Gate fell to him. 15 The lot for the South Gate fell to Obed-Edom, and the lot for the storehouse fell to his sons. 16 The lots for the West Gate and the Shalleketh Gate on the upper road fell to Shuppim and Hosah.
Guard was alongside of guard: 17 There were six Levites a day on the east, four a day on the north, four a day on the south and two at a time at the storehouse. 18 As for the court to the west, there were four at the road and two at the court itself.
19 These were the divisions of the gatekeepers who were descendants of Korah and Merari.

The list of gatekeepers follows the list of singers. In its present form chap. 26 can be divided into two sections: (1) a genealogically based list of gatekeepers (vv. 1–11) and their duties (vv. 12–19) and (2) a further listing of Levites and their duties (vv. 20–32). The gatekeepers were composed of the sons of Korah (vv. 1–3, 9), that is, Kohathites through the line of Izhar (6:22–25); the Obed-Edomites (vv. 4–8), for whom no genealogical connection with the Levites is made; and the sons of Merari (vv. 10–11). The appointment of these by lot is given in vv. 12–19. Other appointments of treasurers and judges follow in vv. 20–32.
Various questions have been raised about the literary arrangement of these individuals. Verses 4–8 appear to represent a strange intrusion into the family of Meshelemiah, which is resumed at v. 9. The reason for this is not clear. Also there is an unexpected imbalance in the number of names. Obed-Edom has sixty-two (v. 8) whereas Meshelemiah has only eighteen (v. 9) and Hosah thirteen (v. 11). The gatekeepers are distributed among three families, but only two are linked with the Levitical genealogies, namely, Meshelemiah through Korah (v. 1) and Hosah through Merari (v. 10). Obed-Edom (v. 4) is not linked to the normal Levitical families.
What precisely did the gatekeepers do? They have generally been regarded by commentators as “cultic officials of a more or less peripheral nature,” and yet they were regarded as important and were classified as Levites, even if of a somewhat lower order. Recent study, however, suggests that the gatekeepers were a paramilitary security force. They possessed three significant roles in the Jerusalem temple-state: (1) the governance of the state, (2) the administration of temple revenue, and (3) the maintenance of the temple and its paraphernalia. There is evidence for this in 1 Chr 26:1–19, and further confirmation is found in the activities of these individuals throughout Chronicles. This information may be gained both in the list of names (vv. 1–11) and in their placement (vv. 12–18). They were stationed at entry ways to buildings and intersections within the city. They functioned as guards for the temple and its precincts from theft or from illegal entry into sacred areas. The vocabulary used by the Chronicler in relation to the gatekeepers ties them firmly to the Judean military establishment. Some of the soldiers who fought in David’s army in 1 Chronicles 12 were Levites (1 Chr 12:27), and priests (1 Chr 12:28), including Zadok, were described in military terms. The priests and Levites were thus related to David’s military organization in 1 Chronicles 12, which explains why chap. 27 fits into these chapters.
26:1–3 Gatekeepers are mentioned in 9:17–27, one of whom was Ebiasaph (9:19), son of Korah. In this verse Meshelemiah is listed as a descendant of Asaph and also as a Korahite. The Korahites belonged to the Levitical family of Kohath (cf. 6:22, 37–38), but Asaph belonged to the family of Gershom (cf. 6:39–43). For “Asaph” here we should read “Ebiasaph,” as in 9:19 and the LXX.
26:4–9 The list of Obed-Edom and his eight sons comes next. Obed-Edom appears as a musician in 15:18, 24, and 16:38 groups him with Hosah among the gatekeepers. His large family provokes the comment that God had blessed him. This also may point back to 13:14, which states that the ark was taken to Obed-Edom’s house after the Philistines returned it to Israel. He is known there as Obed-Edom the Gittite, a person from Gath. On two grounds, therefore, he was mentioned because he provided shelter for the ark and enjoyed God’s blessing in the gift of a large family. We have drawn attention to the apparently intrusive reference of Obed-Edom and his sons into the family of Meshelemiah between vv. 3 and 8 and to the fact that he is not linked to any Levitical family. The description of Obed-Edom’s descendants as “able men” (v. 7) and of Meshelemiah’s descendants also as “able” men (v. 9) is further evidence of the military character of these people.
The figure sixty-two (v. 8) differs slightly from 16:38, which has sixty-eight. We have no way of knowing which figure is correct. Verse 9 picks up after v. 3. The reason for the insertion of vv. 4–8 is not clear to us now.
26:10 Hosah, of the family of Merari, is known from 16:38, where he also is named as a gatekeeper in association with Obed-Edom. His father named him as “firstborn” though he was not firstborn. This practice is known elsewhere in the Old Testament (cf. Gen 48:14).
26:12–13 The gatekeepers were assigned to various gates by lot. The mention of “the temple of the LORD” shows that the material has a post-David influence. Lots were cast for each gate according to their families (cf. 1 Chr 7:11; 11:10) to judge from the vocabulary.
26:14–15 The duties were distributed by gate. We are told little about the gates of the first temple (Solomon’s temple), although conjectures have been made on the basis of later temples like Ezekiel’s visionary temple and Herod’s temple (cf. Ezek 43). The gate of Shalleketh is not mentioned elsewhere. Second Chronicles 25:24 reveals the content of Obed-Edom’s storehouse, where it is said that Jehoash of Israel took all the gold and silver and all the articles found in the temple of God that had been in the care of Obed-Edom. In 9:21 Zechariah is described as the gatekeeper to the Tent of Meeting.
26:16 Shuppim seems to be a dittograph of the preceding word and is deleted by many commentators. To preserve the pattern of names in these verses, only one name is needed here. Some argue that there may have been no south gate in the period of Solomon’s temple because the palace adjoined it on that side and no guard was needed. However, there is a reference to a south gate in Ezek 40:24, 28 as part of a vision of things to come. In any case it would be important to have a guard at an entrance to the palace.
26:17–18 The meaning of the Hebrew word for “court,” parbar, is unknown. The KJV gives this verse the memorable translation, “At Parbar westward, four at the causeway and two at the Parbar.” The Temple Scroll from Qumran suggests this was an area of freestanding pillars to the west of the sanctuary used in connection with various types of offering. The use of obscure terminology, by the way, indicates that the Chronicler had knowledge of the temple beyond what we now possess and lends credibility to his account.
26:19 Only two families are mentioned here, the Korahites (i.e., the Kohathites) and the Merarites. These verses are best seen as a conclusion to vv. 1–3 and 9–11. The sons of Obed-Edom were attached to this list of Kohathites through Korah. There are topographical difficulties in reference to the gates. The original writer had an intimate knowledge of the temple precincts, and he took such knowledge for granted in the reader.


(5) Treasurers and Other Officials (26:20–32)

20 Their fellow Levites were in charge of the treasuries of the house of God and the treasuries for the dedicated things.
21 The descendants of Ladan, who were Gershonites through Ladan and who were heads of families belonging to Ladan the Gershonite, were Jehieli, 22 the sons of Jehieli, Zetham and his brother Joel. They were in charge of the treasuries of the temple of the LORD.
23 From the Amramites, the Izharites, the Hebronites and the Uzzielites:
    24 Shubael, a descendant of Gershom son of Moses, was the officer in charge of the treasuries. 25 His relatives through Eliezer: Rehabiah his son, Jeshaiah his son, Joram his son, Zicri his son and Shelomith his son. 26 Shelomith and his relatives were in charge of all the treasuries for the things dedicated by King David, by the heads of families who were the commanders of thousands and commanders of hundreds, and by the other army commanders. 27 Some of the plunder taken in battle they dedicated for the repair of the temple of the LORD. 28 And everything dedicated by Samuel the seer and by Saul son of Kish, Abner son of Ner and Joab son of Zeruiah, and all the other dedicated things were in the care of Shelomith and his relatives.
    29 From the Izharites: Kenaniah and his sons were assigned duties away from the temple, as officials and judges over Israel.
    30 From the Hebronites: Hashabiah and his relatives—seventeen hundred able men—were responsible in Israel west of the Jordan for all the work of the LORD and for the king’s service. 31 As for the Hebronites, Jeriah was their chief according to the genealogical records of their families. In the fortieth year of David’s reign a search was made in the records, and capable men among the Hebronites were found at Jazer in Gilead. 32 Jeriah had twenty-seven hundred relatives, who were able men and heads of families, and King David put them in charge of the Reubenites, the Gadites and the half-tribe of Manasseh for every matter pertaining to God and for the affairs of the king.

26:20–28 A group of treasurers and other officials concludes chap. 26. It is a single unit comprising a list of fellow Levites. Two treasuries are distinguished, those of “the house of God” (vv. 21–22) and those of “the dedicated things” (vv. 25–28). Shubael, a Kohathite from the family of Amram (cf. 23:12–18), is specially noted as the officer in charge of the treasuries, which probably means both types of treasury (v. 32).
Shelomith and his relatives were in charge of the spoils of war (v. 27). Treasures accumulated by great figures of the past—Samuel, the seer; Saul, son of Kish; Abner; and Joab—were included. The reference to Saul does not indicate any approval of Saul as a person but merely as one who acquired spoils taken in battle.
26:29–32 The descendants of Izhar and Hebron were assigned “duties away from the temple, as officials and judges over Israel.” These outside duties evidently were different from “the king’s service” (v. 30) and “the affairs of the king” (v. 32), both of which were taken over by the Hebronites. The descendants of Izhar thus performed a judicial role. The “officials” were the “helpers” of the judges, a kind of subordinate executive. The Hebronites (vv. 30–32) may have been responsible for religious and secular taxes. Clearly the Levites had a much broader role than that of subordinate temple servants.
A search of the records in the last year of David’s reign, his fortieth (cf. 1 Kgs 2:11; 1 Chr 29:27), revealed that there were Hebronites living at Jazer, one of the Levitical cities (6:81). Its precise location is uncertain though it may be Khirbet Gazzir near the city of Salt. The town once belonged to Sihon, king of the Amorites (Num 21:32).


8. David’s Organization: Civil and Military Arrangements (27:1–34)

This chapter is composed of four separate, perhaps originally unrelated lists: (1) commanders of the monthly courses (vv. 1–15), (2) officers of the tribes (vv. 16–24), (3) stewards of David’s property (vv. 25–31), and (4) David’s advisors (vv. 32–34).
Chapter 26 concludes by naming those Levites who were assigned to semisecular duties. Chapter 27 moves naturally to other non-Levitical military and administrative personnel. But while the contents of chaps. 23–26 deal mainly with preparations for the construction of the temple, chap. 27 has little if anything to do with the temple or the Levites. However, as observed at chap. 26 regarding the gatekeepers, there was a close connection between religious and military orders. Furthermore, J. Sailhamer has suggested that chaps. 23–27 are outlined in reverse by the statement in 23:2 that David “gathered together [organized] all the leaders of Israel, as well as the priests and Levites.” Some regard the chapter, however, as a series of appendixes included at the end of the account of David’s reign to round out the record and to take note of some important features of his reign not mentioned in earlier chapters.


(1) The Commanders of the Monthly Relays (27:1–15)

1 This is the list of the Israelites—heads of families, commanders of thousands and commanders of hundreds, and their officers, who served the king in all that concerned the army divisions that were on duty month by month throughout the year. Each division consisted of 24,000 men.
    2 In charge of the first division, for the first month, was Jashobeam son of Zabdiel. There were 24,000 men in his division. 3 He was a descendant of Perez and chief of all the army officers for the first month.
    4 In charge of the division for the second month was Dodai the Ahohite; Mikloth was the leader of his division. There were 24,000 men in his division.
    5 The third army commander, for the third month, was Benaiah son of Jehoiada the priest. He was chief and there were 24,000 men in his division. 6 This was the Benaiah who was a mighty man among the Thirty and was over the Thirty. His son Ammizabad was in charge of his division.
    7 The fourth, for the fourth month, was Asahel the brother of Joab; his son Zebadiah was his successor. There were 24,000 men in his division.
    8 The fifth, for the fifth month, was the commander Shamhuth the Izrahite. There were 24,000 men in his division.
    9 The sixth, for the sixth month, was Ira the son of Ikkesh the Tekoite. There were 24,000 men in his division.
    10 The seventh, for the seventh month, was Helez the Pelonite, an Ephraimite. There were 24,000 men in his division.
    11 The eighth, for the eighth month, was Sibbecai the Hushathite, a Zerahite. There were 24,000 men in his division.
    12 The ninth, for the ninth month, was Abiezer the Anathothite, a Benjamite. There were 24,000 men in his division.
    13 The tenth, for the tenth month, was Maharai the Netophathite, a Zerahite. There were 24,000 men in his division.
    14 The eleventh, for the eleventh month, was Benaiah the Pirathonite, an Ephraimite. There were 24,000 men in his division.
    15 The twelfth, for the twelfth month, was Heldai the Netophathite, from the family of Othniel. There were 24,000 men in his division.

27:1 The names of the commanders are parallel to those in the list of David’s heroes in 11:11–47 and 2 Sam 23:8–39. This verse should be seen as a heading to vv. 2–15 rather than to the whole chapter. The groups mentioned—“heads of families,” “commanders of hundreds, and their officers”—are well known in military contexts elsewhere and so form an appropriate heading to the military material of vv. 2–15. Many commentators think that there is a certain artificiality about this list. But surely David set up arrangements to call fighting men together (1 Chr 21) into a citizen’s army. The compiler of this record presents a carefully ordered statement about David’s army—twelve divisions each consisting of twenty-four thousand men, each obligated to serve the king’s army for a month a year, each commanded by an officer bearing the name of one of David’s heroes. The army was arranged in perfect order in a strictly systematic scheme.
27:2–3 Jashobeam, described here as the son of Zabdiel, a descendant of Perez, is referred to as “a Hacmonite” in 11:11. He is introduced as the chief of all the army officers for the first month. This formula is repeated with slight variations in the remaining verses in this section.
27:4–6 Benaiah, son of Jehoiada, is listed as a valiant fighter from Kabzeel who performed great exploits in 11:22.
27:7–15 Asahel, the brother of Joab, met his death before David became king (2 Sam 2:18–23). In fact, his son and successor Zebadiah commanded the division. Shamhuth, the Izrahite, appears in v. 11 as Zerahite. The origins of several of the commanders show how they were drawn from various parts of the land: Tekoa (v. 9), Ephraim (v. 10), Anathoth (v. 12), and so forth.


(2) The Officers of the Tribes (27:16–24)

    16 The officers over the tribes of Israel:
    over the Reubenites: Eliezer son of Zicri;

    over the Simeonites: Shephatiah son of Maacah;
    17 over Levi: Hashabiah son of Kemuel;
    over Aaron: Zadok;
    18 over Judah: Elihu, a brother of David;
    over Issachar: Omri son of Michael;
    19 over Zebulun: Ishmaiah son of Obadiah;
    over Naphtali: Jerimoth son of Azriel;
    20 over the Ephraimites: Hoshea son of Azaziah;
    over half the tribe of Manasseh: Joel son of Pedaiah;
    21 over the half-tribe of Manasseh in Gilead: Iddo son of Zechariah;
    over Benjamin: Jaasiel son of Abner;
    22 over Dan: Azarel son of Jeroham.
These were the officers over the tribes of Israel.
23 David did not take the number of the men twenty years old or less, because the LORD had promised to make Israel as numerous as the stars in the sky. 24 Joab son of Zeruiah began to count the men but did not finish. Wrath came on Israel on account of this numbering, and the number was not entered in the book of the annals of King David.

27:16 The order of the tribes in these verses does not correspond exactly to any other listing in the Old Testament, although the verses contain some parallels with 1 Chr 2:1–2 and Numbers 1, especially vv. 20–22. The present list differs from the list in 1 Chronicles 2 in several ways. It places Napthali in Dan’s position and sets Dan at the end of the list; Joseph in 1 Chronicles 2 becomes Ephraim, Half-Manasseh (east), and Half-Manasseh (west); and Gad and Asher in 1 Chronicles 2 are lacking in 1 Chronicles 27, probably to maintain the number of tribes at twelve. Differences between these lists make it clear that although there is general correspondence between them there was no slavish borrowing, although 1 Chronicles 27 is closer to 1 Chronicles 2 than to Numbers 1.
The similarity of style to Num 1:1–19 is perhaps another indication that the Chronicler considered David to be a second Moses (see the discussion of 22:11–13).
27:17 The tribe of Levi is counted as one of the tribes although it was set apart from the “secular” tribes because of its involvement with religious duties. It is something of a surprise, however, to discover that Aaron is listed as a tribe of which the leader was Zadok. No other evidence indicates that Aaron was ever reckoned as a tribe separate from Levi. Another fact is that the father of Zadok is not mentioned. Why these individuals were presented in this way is not clear, but perhaps the Chronicler intended to enhance the status of the Aaronic family.
27:18–22 There is no “Elihu” mentioned among David’s brothers in the genealogy of 1 Chr 2:13–15. Either Eliab is meant (as in the LXX) or Elihu is the eighth brother not listed in the genealogy (1 Sam 16:10–11; 17:12). Perhaps also “brother” was used in the sense of “relative.”
27:23–24 If one were to read these verses in isolation, they would imply that Joab was to blame for the census and that David was innocent. But this is an allusion to the account in chap. 21 where Joab acted under David’s orders (21:2). Perhaps this points out the need for exercising caution in reading the Bible: the impression we get from one passage may not be the whole story. The census was intended for men twenty years old or more (cf. Num 1:3). The present text states that Joab did not finish; from 21:5–6 we learn that he did not count Levi and Benjamin.


(3) The Stewards of Crown Property (27:25–31)

25 Azmaveth son of Adiel was in charge of the royal storehouses.
Jonathan son of Uzziah was in charge of the storehouses in the outlying districts, in the towns, the villages and the watchtowers.
26 Ezri son of Kelub was in charge of the field workers who farmed the land.
27 Shimei the Ramathite was in charge of the vineyards.
Zabdi the Shiphmite was in charge of the produce of the vineyards for the wine vats.
28 Baal-Hanan the Gederite was in charge of the olive and sycamore-fig trees in the western foothills.
Joash was in charge of the supplies of olive oil.
29 Shitrai the Sharonite was in charge of the herds grazing in Sharon.
Shaphat son of Adlai was in charge of the herds in the valleys.
30 Obil the Ishmaelite was in charge of the camels.
Jehdeiah the Meronothite was in charge of the donkeys.
31 Jaziz the Hagrite was in charge of the flocks.
All these were the officials in charge of King David’s property.

There is no indication of formal taxation in the modern sense. Crown expenditure was met by income from crown property. Kings in the ancient Near East acquired large areas of land, often as a result of military conquest, and drew on these resources for state expenses. These verses provide an interesting insight into the range of income-producing activities that provided the economic strength of the kingdom. Exactly twelve names are listed, conforming to the pattern of twelves elsewhere in Chronicles.
27:25 Storehouses for spoils of war were set up in many areas. We may have a glimpse into the nature of these in excavated storehouses at Megiddo, Beersheba, and elsewhere.
27:26–31 The management of crown property also was important—the text mentions the farmers (v. 26), the vineyards and the wineries (v. 27), the olive and sycamore-fig trees and the production of olive oil (v. 28), the cattle herds (v. 29), the camels and she-asses (v. 30), and the flocks (v. 31). The far-reaching agricultural and pastoral activities of the king are striking, but the king needed considerable support for the maintenance of his court and his administration. All this wealth enhanced the prestige of the king and bore testimony to the way God had blessed his loyal and faithful servant. Some of these activities have been illustrated by modern archaeological excavations. Numerous ancient olive vats have come to light. Ancient quarries bear testimony to building activities. Excavations at Gibeon have uncovered a winery with wine jars, wine presses, and fermenters.


(4) David’s Personal Counselors (27:32–34)

32 Jonathan, David’s uncle, was a counselor, a man of insight and a scribe. Jehiel son of Hacmoni took care of the king’s sons.
33 Ahithophel was the king’s counselor.
Hushai the Arkite was the king’s friend. 34 Ahithophel was succeeded by Jehoiada son of Benaiah and by Abiathar.
Joab was the commander of the royal army.

Along with public counselors and administrative officials (18:14–17; cf. 2 Sam 8:15–18; 20:23–26), David had private advisers.
27:32 “Jonathan, David’s uncle,” is not otherwise known. We cannot be certain all that was involved in being a scribe during David’s time. He was not necessarily in the same profession as the later scribes but perhaps was a secretary in the more general sense. Jehiel the Hacmonite is not otherwise known.
27:33 Ahithophel was the well-known counselor of David who committed suicide when his counsel was rejected (2 Sam 16:23; 17:23). He defected to Absalom during Absalom’s rebellion. Hushai, the Arkite, remained loyal to David (2 Sam 15:32ff.). The description of him as “the king’s friend” may have referred to a specific office, as in Egypt.
27:34 Jehoiada, son of Benaiah (not otherwise known), and Abiathar, a long-standing associate of David (1 Sam 22:20–23), succeeded Ahithophel. Abiathar is not here called a priest; perhaps the writer believed that legitimate priesthood was assumed only through the line of Zadok, Abiathar’s rival. Joab was not a close friend of David, but perhaps his skills were such that David could not afford to dismiss him. He incurred David’s wrath for the murder of Abner, the previous commander (2 Sam 3:29, 39; 1 Kgs 2:5–6, 32).
With this list of the king’s inner circle of advisors and counselors the description of David’s administration comes to a close. The whole picture that emerges gives expression to the belief that Israel’s total religious and governmental structure was inaugurated by David and provided a pattern for the future. The subsequent centuries showed that the pattern was not as static as may appear at first sight but was open to the possibility of change and development.


9. David’s Final Instructions: His Second Speech (28:1–21)

Already in 22:6–16 David delivered a private charge to Solomon. In chap. 28 he resumes the thought of chap. 22, which was interrupted by chaps. 23–27. Now David summoned the people and addressed them as well as his son Solomon. There was a public commissioning of Solomon (28:1–10) and the handing over of the plans for the temple (28:11–21).
The chapter, after a brief introduction (vv. 1–2a), falls into three parts: (1) David’s presentation of Solomon as the temple builder (vv. 2–10); (2) the temple plans are transferred to Solomon (vv. 11–19); and (3) the concluding exhortation is given (vv. 20–21). In both content and structure David’s speech here is closely related to chap. 22 although there are differences. It is not surprising to find these parallels since the subject matter is similar.


(1) Address to the People and to Solomon (28:1–10)

1 David summoned all the officials of Israel to assemble at Jerusalem: the officers over the tribes, the commanders of the divisions in the service of the king, the commanders of thousands and commanders of hundreds, and the officials in charge of all the property and livestock belonging to the king and his sons, together with the palace officials, the mighty men and all the brave warriors.
2 King David rose to his feet and said: “Listen to me, my brothers and my people. I had it in my heart to build a house as a place of rest for the ark of the covenant of the LORD, for the footstool of our God, and I made plans to build it. 3 But God said to me, ‘You are not to build a house for my Name, because you are a warrior and have shed blood.’
4 “Yet the LORD, the God of Israel, chose me from my whole family to be king over Israel forever. He chose Judah as leader, and from the house of Judah he chose my family, and from my father’s sons he was pleased to make me king over all Israel. 5 Of all my sons—and the LORD has given me many—he has chosen my son Solomon to sit on the throne of the kingdom of the LORD over Israel. 6 He said to me: ‘Solomon your son is the one who will build my house and my courts, for I have chosen him to be my son, and I will be his father. 7 I will establish his kingdom forever if he is unswerving in carrying out my commands and laws, as is being done at this time.’
8 “So now I charge you in the sight of all Israel and of the assembly of the LORD, and in the hearing of our God: Be careful to follow all the commands of the LORD your God, that you may possess this good land and pass it on as an inheritance to your descendants forever.
9 “And you, my son Solomon, acknowledge the God of your father, and serve him with wholehearted devotion and with a willing mind, for the LORD searches every heart and understands every motive behind the thoughts. If you seek him, he will be found by you; but if you forsake him, he will reject you forever. 10 Consider now, for the LORD has chosen you to build a temple as a sanctuary. Be strong and do the work.”

28:1 This verse repeats the material of 23:2. It is a literary device designed to resume the narrative from chap. 23 after the inclusion of the important data of chaps. 23–27.

28:2 “Listen to me” (šĕmāʿûnî) is plural imperative. Plural verb forms are used throughout v. 8 when David addressed the whole nation. Here David saw the assembly as “my brothers and my people.” In a brief historical résumé David declares that it had been in his heart to build a house as a place of rest for the ark of the covenant of Yahweh so that God might be among his people. The ark is here called God’s footstool as in cf. Ps 132:7.
28:3 These ideas are a reiteration of words in 22:8–9.
28:4–7 David legitimized his dynasty both retrospectively and prospectively by looking backward to the selection of Judah as the ruling tribe and forward to the selection of Solomon as his successor. The selection of Judah is recounted in Gen 49:8–12. The dynastic oracle of Nathan (2 Sam 7) also lies in the background of this speech. David also sought to preclude the possibility that rivals would try to take the throne upon his death. Reverting to God’s words to Nathan (17:12–13; 22:10), David asserted that Solomonic succession fulfilled the precise intention of God. At the same time, he reminded them all that the continued success of the dynasty depended upon faithfulness to God.
28:8 The use of plural verb forms in the Hebrew behind “be careful to follow all the commands of the Lord your God, that you may possess this good land and pass it on as an inheritance to your descendants forever” indicates that this exhortation is still part of the address to the leaders of Israel. Within David’s speech to the men before him—and to the readers of Chronicles—there lies a profound message. David, the great king and leader of Israel, must pass from the scene. What future or hope can the people have? Their hope must not be in David, whom they see but whose strength and wisdom are limited, but in God, whom they do not see but whose presence, power, goodness, and wisdom are forever. It was God who chose the house of David, God who determined who would build the temple, God who gave the commandments in which are life and peace, and God who would remain when David was gone. Israel must not despair the loss of their great king but realize that their only hope is in God.
28:9–10 At this point the address is directed to Solomon with the assembled company as witnesses. He was to acknowledge (daʿ) the God of David and serve him with wholehearted devotion and with a willing mind. He also reminded Solomon of a specific area in which he needed to be faithful to God: he must finish the temple. The temple was the abode of Yahweh and the symbol of his presence in the land among his people.


(2) The Presentation of the Temple Plans to Solomon (28:11–19)

11 Then David gave his son Solomon the plans for the portico of the temple, its buildings, its storerooms, its upper parts, its inner rooms and the place of atonement. 12 He gave him the plans of all that the Spirit had put in his mind for the courts of the temple of the LORD and all the surrounding rooms, for the treasuries of the temple of God and for the treasuries for the dedicated things. 13 He gave him instructions for the divisions of the priests and Levites, and for all the work of serving in the temple of the LORD, as well as for all the articles to be used in its service. 14 He designated the weight of gold for all the gold articles to be used in various kinds of service, and the weight of silver for all the silver articles to be used in various kinds of service: 15 the weight of gold for the gold lampstands and their lamps, with the weight for each lampstand and its lamps; and the weight of silver for each silver lampstand and its lamps, according to the use of each lampstand; 16 the weight of gold for each table for consecrated bread; the weight of silver for the silver tables; 17 the weight of pure gold for the forks, sprinkling bowls and pitchers; the weight of gold for each gold dish; the weight of silver for each silver dish; 18 and the weight of the refined gold for the altar of incense. He also gave him the plan for the chariot, that is, the cherubim of gold that spread their wings and shelter the ark of the covenant of the LORD.
19 “All this,” David said, “I have in writing from the hand of the LORD upon me, and he gave me understanding in all the details of the plan.”

28:11 The Chronicler places David in the same position in reference to the temple as that which Moses occupied in reference to the tabernacle. (See comments at 22:11–13 and 27:16–24.) For the Chronicler the temple was a continuation of the tabernacle. The reference to the “plan” (tabnît) recalls the narrative in Exod 25:9, 40, where the same Hebrew word is used. Three times he mentions the transference of the plans of the temple from David to Solomon (vv. 11–12a, 19). More than that, the physical shape of the two was similar even though the tabernacle was made of timber and skins; and the temple, of stone.
We have no way of knowing what David gave to Solomon. It may very well have been some outline sketch, a descriptive plan produced under inspiration (v. 19), perhaps the main components of the temple. The “details of the plan” would be filled in by the architects.
28:12 A question of translation arises here. The word rûʿaḥ can mean “mind” or “spirit.” Some translate this “the plan of all that was with him by the Spirit” and take this to mean “under inspiration.” Others use the word “mind” and translate “the pattern of all that he had in mind.” The plans were for the courts of the temple and all the surrounding rooms, the treasuries of the temple of God, and the treasuries of the dedicated things. The treasuries have been discussed in 26:22–28.
28:13–19 In mentioning the Levitical duties, the articles of the temple, and the cherubim for the temple, the Chronicler is asserting that this was more David’s temple than Solomon’s. David was responsible for the entire project. The golden vessels are referred to in 2 Chr 4:7–8, 19–22. By clearly stating that these plans were committed to writing (v. 19), the Chronicler further implies that David’s instructions to Solomon were specific and were carried out in detail. They were not mere impressions or ideas.
Verse 18 contains a wordplay—hammerkābâ hakĕrûbîm, “the chariot, the cherubim.” The ark between the cherubim frequently was referred to as God’s throne (Exod 25:22; Num 7:89; 1 Sam 4:4; 2 Sam 6:2; 2 Kgs 19:15; Isa 37:16). Ezekiel 1:10 is the only other place where the idea occurs, although the word “chariot” does not occur there.
The NIV translation of v. 19 seems to have missed the mark. The Hebrew syntax is better reflected by the NRSV rendering, “All this, in writing at the LORD’S direction, he made clear to me—the plan of all the works.” The Lord guided David in recording the plans for the temple he had revealed, so that the temple was from God just as the tabernacle had been.
That the Chronicler never implies that the second temple, the temple that stood in his day, should be built according to the same plan is significant. Again we are misreading Chronicles if we conclude that it teaches that the Davidic-Solomonic period was the once-for-all ideal for the kingdom of God and that any future manifestation of God’s kingdom must follow this pattern exactly. The temple of Solomon, as Chronicles presents it, upholds the ideal of pure worship in the kingdom of God, but it does not assert that any future fulfillment of the ideal will be in all points the same.


(3) Concluding Exhortation (28:20–21)

20 David also said to Solomon his son, “Be strong and courageous, and do the work. Do not be afraid or discouraged, for the LORD God, my God, is with you. He will not fail you or forsake you until all the work for the service of the temple of the LORD is finished. 21 The divisions of the priests and Levites are ready for all the work on the temple of God, and every willing man skilled in any craft will help you in all the work. The officials and all the people will obey your every command.”

28:20–21 Once again Solomon is given a charge by David to be strong and courageous and to do the work (cf. 22:11–13; 28:10). Helpers lay ready to assist in the building who would obey Solomon’s every command. The extent of this support is spelled out in 29:1–9. Solomon also was given the assurance by David that “the LORD God, my God, is with you.” David stressed that God is Yahweh, the God of Israel, but that he also is specifically the God of David and his dynasty. In this Solomon could take the throne with full confidence of success. The next major division of Chronicles, in 2 Chr 1–9, shows how Solomon undertook his task.




10. The Climax of David’s Reign (29:1–30)

Only some concluding aspects of David’s story remain to be recorded: (1) contributions of the people for the temple building (29:1–9), (2) David’s prayer of thanksgiving (29:10–19), (3) Solomon’s accession to the throne (29:20–25), and (4) the close of David’s reign (29:26–30). David left the affairs of the kingdom in perfect readiness for his son Solomon to take up his own work.


(1) The Contributions of the People for the Temple Building (29:1–9)

1 Then King David said to the whole assembly: “My son Solomon, the one whom God has chosen, is young and inexperienced. The task is great, because this palatial structure is not for man but for the LORD God. 2 With all my resources I have provided for the temple of my God—gold for the gold work, silver for the silver, bronze for the bronze, iron for the iron and wood for the wood, as well as onyx for the settings, turquoise, stones of various colors, and all kinds of fine stone and marble—all of these in large quantities. 3 Besides, in my devotion to the temple of my God I now give my personal treasures of gold and silver for the temple of my God, over and above everything I have provided for this holy temple: 4 three thousand talents of gold (gold of Ophir) and seven thousand talents of refined silver, for the overlaying of the walls of the buildings, 5 for the gold work and the silver work, and for all the work to be done by the craftsmen. Now, who is willing to consecrate himself today to the LORD?”
6 Then the leaders of families, the officers of the tribes of Israel, the commanders of thousands and commanders of hundreds, and the officials in charge of the king’s work gave willingly. 7 They gave toward the work on the temple of God five thousand talents and ten thousand darics of gold, ten thousand talents of silver, eighteen thousand talents of bronze and a hundred thousand talents of iron. 8 Any who had precious stones gave them to the treasury of the temple of the LORD in the custody of Jehiel the Gershonite. 9 The people rejoiced at the willing response of their leaders, for they had given freely and wholeheartedly to the LORD. David the king also rejoiced greatly.

29:1–6 There is a parallel between the account of the building of the tabernacle in Moses’ day when the people responded with generous gifts and the gifts that the leaders and people give for the temple here (cf. Exod 25:1–7; 35:4–9, 20–29). It is a theme that has been touched on in 22:2–5. The divine choice of Solomon is stressed again (cf. 28:4–5), but David reminded the assembly of Solomon’s youth and inexperience (especially in political matters) and went on to urge them to give him support (v. 5). Solomon’s primary task would be to build the temple. It is called here a “palatial structure” to remind the people and Solomon that the true King of Israel was to be the Lord God. The degree to which Solomon and his royal successors were to succeed as kings and Israel was to flourish would depend upon the extent to which they remembered that fact. This is what made the task of temple building so great.
David’s generosity was lavish and served as a catalyst for the generosity of the people. Leaders will never see openhanded giving from their people if they are not willing to take the lead in this as well. In addition to David’s gifts from the spoils of war, which were considerable, David had a personal treasure of gold from Ophir. The Hebrew word for “personal treasure” (sĕgullâ) occurs only seven times in the Hebrew Bible, elsewhere of Israel as the Lord’s precious, private possession (Exod 19:5; Deut 7:6; 14:2; 26:18; Ps 135:4; Mal 3:17).
Following his own sacrificial giving, David challenged Israel to do the same (v. 5). The verb translated “be willing” (nādab) is used elsewhere in reference to making freewill offerings for building the tabernacle (Exod 25:2; 35:21, 29) and the second temple (Ezra 1:6; cf. 7:16) and for volunteering for military service (Judg 5:2, 9; 2 Chr 17:16). The related noun (nidbâ) is the word for “freewill offering” (Lev 7:16). It is used of gifts that were not required but prompted by one’s heart (Exod 25:2) or spirit (Exod 35:21). The expression translated “consecrate” means literally to “fill the hand” and is used many times of ordination to the priesthood (cf. Exod 28:41; 29:9; 2 Chr 13:9) and once of the dedication of the altar (Ezek 43:26). Thus David viewed these gifts for the temple as symbols of Israel’s giving themselves wholly to the Lord, pledging themselves afresh as “a kingdom of priests and a holy nation” (Exod 19:6; cf. 2 Chr 29:31).
29:7–9 This vast array of contributions on the part of the king stimulated the officials to offer their gifts, which, in quantity, exceeded those of the king. A daric was a Persian coin and was in current use in the days of the Chronicler. In terms of the way money was counted in Solomon’s day, the use of the term was an anachronism; but it was no doubt an attempt to express money value in terms of a later equivalent, a practice that is common enough in our day when Bible translators express ancient measures in terms of a modern equivalent. Precious stones were given into the custody of Jahiel, the Gershonite (cf. 26:21f.), whose family had connections with the treasury of the house of the Lord. Such a generous response from the leaders caused the people to rejoice, a reaction that was quite characteristic of other major occasions in Israel as, for example, when the temple was dedicated (2 Chr 7:8–10; but cf. 1 Chr 15:25; 2 Chr 20:26–27). That the bringing of gifts to the Lord caused rejoicing is interesting. It implies that the people gave freely and wholeheartedly (cf. 2 Cor 9:7). J. G. McConville has written, “People are closest to God-likeness in self-giving, and the nearer they approach God-likeness the more genuinely and rightly they become capable of rejoicing.” As David had learned vividly and painfully, “The search for true happiness cannot be along the path of self-gratification.”


(2) David’s Prayer (29:10–19)

10 David praised the LORD in the presence of the whole assembly, saying,
    “Praise be to you, O LORD,
    God of our father Israel,
    from everlasting to everlasting.
    11 Yours, O LORD, is the greatness and the power
    and the glory and the majesty and the splendor,
    for everything in heaven and earth is yours.
    Yours, O LORD, is the kingdom;
    you are exalted as head over all.
    12 Wealth and honor come from you;
    you are the ruler of all things.
    In your hands are strength and power
    to exalt and give strength to all.
    13 Now, our God, we give you thanks,
    and praise your glorious name.
14 “But who am I, and who are my people, that we should be able to give as generously as this? Everything comes from you, and we have given you only what comes from your hand. 15 We are aliens and strangers in your sight, as were all our forefathers. Our days on earth are like a shadow, without hope. 16 O LORD our God, as for all this abundance that we have provided for building you a temple for your Holy Name, it comes from your hand, and all of it belongs to you. 17 I know, my God, that you test the heart and are pleased with integrity. All these things have I given willingly and with honest intent. And now I have seen with joy how willingly your people who are here have given to you. 18 O LORD, God of our fathers Abraham, Isaac and Israel, keep this desire in the hearts of your people forever, and keep their hearts loyal to you. 19 And give my son Solomon the wholehearted devotion to keep your commands, requirements and decrees and to do everything to build the palatial structure for which I have provided.”

The presentation of such a wealth of gifts to the Lord called forth David’s praise and thanksgiving to the Lord, who is the giver of every good and perfect gift in the first place.
29:10 The words translated “praise” and “praised” are from the verb bārak, “bless.” Usually it is God who blesses us, but the word is used of praise to God elsewhere in Neh 8:6; Ps 145:21.
29:11–13 The first part of this prayer has found its way into Christian liturgy as the doxology appended to the Lord’s Prayer: “Yours, O LORD, is the greatness and the power and the glory,” although this ascription of praise here adds “and the majesty and the splendor.” As Allen has noted, David’s prayer “ransacks the theological dictionary” for terms expressing God’s sovereign and boundless power and regal grandeur. It ascribes to Yahweh the possession of everything in heaven and earth. His is the kingdom, and he is exalted as head over all (cf. 2 Chr 20:6). Wealth and honor come from him. He is ruler over all things, and in his hands are the strength and power to exalt and give strength to all.
29:14 David and the people had brought their gifts and had given generously. But they had only given back what had come from God’s hand. David is recorded as asking, “Who am I?” twice elsewhere—once of Saul (1 Sam 18:18) and once more of the Lord (2 Sam 7:18; 1 Chr 17:16).
29:15–16 The terms translated “aliens” and “strangers” frequently were used of the patriarchs (Gen 17:8; 21:23; 23:4; 1 Chr 16:19; cf. Heb 11:13–14). They spoke of persons without property and therefore without security of their own who lived in an area only by the good graces of its citizens. Like widows and orphans, they were in need of protection (Lev 19:10, 33–34; Deut 10:18–19). Even after possessing the land, Israel was to have this attitude about themselves, remembering that the land really belonged to the Lord (Lev 25:23). In his very nature man is only a resident alien and a sojourner on earth. His days are like a shadow and without hope. Not even the wealth and security that had been granted to David would alter man’s lot (cf. Job 7:6; 8:9; Ps 144:4). D. J. Estes sees in this verse an advance toward a concept of a spiritual pilgrimage. The life of the foreigner serves as the analogy to the life of the pious man in a world estranged from God (1 Pet 2:11).
29:17 Knowing that God examines the heart (Jer 11:20; 17:10; 20:12) and is pleased with uprightness (1 Kgs 9:4), David had given all his offerings willingly and with honest intent and had joyfully watched God’s people contribute willingly to him.
29:18 Reference already has been made to the patriarchs in vv. 10, 15. The Chronicler had dwelt on this theme in Asaph’s psalm of thanks to the Lord (16:8–36). Several of the themes taken up there reappear here. Israel had received a promise long ago. They were the benefactors of God’s favor toward them and had thus been able to bring gifts. David’s prayer was that this desire to give willingly to the Lord in return for all his past favors should remain in their hearts forever and that God might keep their hearts loyal to him.
29:19 David’s special supplication was that the Lord himself would establish a perfect heart in both Israel and Solomon so that God’s commandments might be kept and the temple built. It is noteworthy that the keeping of the law is set alongside the building of the temple. These two were indissolubly bound together. A temple without wholehearted devotion to the law was an empty gesture.
David’s prayer remains a model of piety for worshipers in every age. A comparison of this prayer with the Psalms will reveal many similarities (see esp. Ps 39).


(3) Solomon’s Accession to the Throne (29:20–25)

20 Then David said to the whole assembly, “Praise the LORD your God.” So they all praised the LORD, the God of their fathers; they bowed low and fell prostrate before the LORD and the king.
21 The next day they made sacrifices to the LORD and presented burnt offerings to him: a thousand bulls, a thousand rams and a thousand male lambs, together with their drink offerings, and other sacrifices in abundance for all Israel. 22 They ate and drank with great joy in the presence of the LORD that day.
Then they acknowledged Solomon son of David as king a second time, anointing him before the LORD to be ruler and Zadok to be priest. 23 So Solomon sat on the throne of the LORD as king in place of his father David. He prospered and all Israel obeyed him. 24 All the officers and mighty men, as well as all of King David’s sons, pledged their submission to King Solomon.
25 The LORD highly exalted Solomon in the sight of all Israel and bestowed on him royal splendor such as no king over Israel ever had before.

The Chronicler presents not one but two great kings as the ideal for Israel. The one was David, the warrior-king, who subdued the enemies of the people of God and established a secure domain. He was now passing, and the other, Solomon, was taking his place. Solomon was a man of peace who would build up the prosperity of the nation. These two things together—victory over enemies and a reign of peace—are both essential. For Christian readers these two ideals are fulfilled in the one man, Jesus Christ. He conquers all his foes but at the same time establishes a reign of peace for his own people. In this the tandem of David and Solomon are a type of Christ.
29:21–22a The term “sacrifices” (zābaḥ) is a general word. The nature of these sacrifices is spelled out immediately as “burnt offerings.” But there may have been “peace offerings” also in which the worshipers shared. There were, as well, drink offerings. The people ate and drank with great joy in the presence of the Lord that day. We are reminded of the occasion when fighting men came to Hebron to make David king and spent three days eating and drinking (12:38–40). Vast numbers of animals were presented on the occasion of Solomon’s anointing: a thousand bulls, a thousand rams, and a thousand male lambs. The mention of sacrifices for “all Israel” recalls the common motif formed so often in Chronicles (see also 29:23, 25–26). This enormous number of sacrifices (at least three thousand animals) points to the significance of the event (cf. 2 Chr 7:4–5; 30:23–27; 35:7–9).
29:22b–23 The suggestion that this acknowledgment of Solomon took place a second time raises a question. The phrase “a second time” is lacking in the LXX and is omitted by some commentators as a gloss. But it is a true statement of the facts. In a time of uncertainty, when the rebel Adonijah was trying to usurp David’s throne by a great display of religious fervor and the offering of sacrifices (1 Kgs 1:9), Nathan the prophet, Zadok the priest, and Benaiah the army commander with David’s permission anointed Solomon king (1 Kgs 1:32–40). But that anointing was a hurried and semiprivate arrangement lacking the pomp and ceremony of a great national occasion. Hence Solomon had to be anointed a second time with proper solemnity and appropriate religious decorum. Assuming that the phrase is original, it shows that the Chronicler, while focusing on the successful transference of the throne to God’s chosen “man of peace,” was not unaware of the conflict surrounding Solomon’s accession. At the same time, Zadok was acknowledged as high priest.
29:23–25 David’s final act was witnessing the anointing of Solomon. At what point David died we are not told. But the Lord prospered him, and Israel obeyed him. Solomon was exalted in the sight of all Israel over his rivals and enjoyed royal splendor such as no king over Israel ever had before him, even David. Yet Jesus was to say of himself in Luke 11:31, “One greater than Solomon is here.”


(4) The Death of David and the Close of His Reign (29:26–30)

26 David son of Jesse was king over all Israel. 27 He ruled over Israel forty years—seven in Hebron and thirty-three in Jerusalem. 28 He died at a good old age, having enjoyed long life, wealth and honor. His son Solomon succeeded him as king.
29 As for the events of King David’s reign, from beginning to end, they are written in the records of Samuel the seer, the records of Nathan the prophet and the records of Gad the seer, 30 together with the details of his reign and power, and the circumstances that surrounded him and Israel and the kingdoms of all the other lands.

29:26–27 The “all Israel” motif continues. David’s rule had been over “all Israel” forty years, seven in Hebron and thirty-three in Jerusalem.
29:28 This verse echoes 23:1. David’s enjoyment of long life, wealth, and honor and the accession of Solomon in his place were all marks of divine approval of and divine blessing for his faithful servant. The summation of David’s long and healthy life is comparable to that given for Moses (Deut 34:7).
29:29–30 The use of written records preserved by Samuel, Nathan the prophet, and Gad the seer may be a reference to material now found in the canonical books of Samuel and Kings. Whether or not that is the case, the point here is that the facts to which Chronicles bears witness are well attested and that in fact David did much more than is written here. The phrase “the kingdoms of all the other lands” is peculiar to the Chronicler. It refers to other countries close to Israel, especially those over which David held dominion—Philistia, Moab, the Aramean States, Edom, Ammon, and Tyre. David’s task was completed. His dynasty was established with the enthronement of Solomon. Plans for the building of the temple were in hand. Completion of that task was part and parcel of the eternal establishment of the Davidic dynasty.
